abdicate: (vb) to give up, often in a formal manner
King Edward VIII abdicated the throne in order to marry Mrs. Wallis Simpson, a divorced American.
Word Forms: abdicable, abdicative, abdicator, abdication Antonym Form: unabdicative

aberrant: (adj) unusual
My dog displayed aberrant behavior when he refused to greet me at the door or eat any of the treats I offered.
Word Forms: aberrance, aberrancy, aberrantly, aberrate, aberrational

abeyance: (n) temporary suspension
The council voted to place the decision in abeyance for a month while more research was conducted.
Word Forms: abeyant, abeyancy

abjure: (vb) to give up, often in a formal manner
King Edward VIII abjured the throne in order to marry Mrs. Wallis Simpson, a divorced American.
Word Forms: abjuratory, abjurer, abjuration Antonym Forms: unabjuratory, unabjured, nonabjuratory

abstemious: (adj) sparing in consumption, especially of food and drink
Abby’s emaciated figure was the result of her abstemious lifestyle; she never ate breakfast or lunch, and rarely ate
dinner.
Word Forms: abstemiously, abstemiousness

abstruse: (adj) hard to understand
Mr. Abbot tried to teach us how to solve an abstruse math problem, but it was too complicated for us to understand.
Word Forms: abstrusely, abstruseness, abstrusity

accretion: (n) an increase
Akeem's gradual accretion of duties at work did not go unnoticed; he was given a raise for taking on the extra work.
Word Forms: accrete, accretive, accretionary Antonym Forms: nonaccretion, nonaccretive

acerbic: (adj) sour; harsh
Sour Patch Kids candy tastes like acerbic gummy bears.
Word Forms: acerbically, acerbate, acerbity Antonym Forms: unacerbic, unacerbically

acidulous: (adj) sour; sharp
Her acidulous criticism of my paper on Shakespeare was disappointing since I had invested many hours in research.
Word Forms: acidulent, acidulation Related Words: subacidulous, acid

acme: (n) the highest point
The Roman Empire reached its acme of power around 11 AD, but a slow decline occurred over the next four
centuries.
Word Forms: acmic, acmatic,

acumen: (n) good judgment
The judge was respected for his acumen when sentencing convicted defendants.
Word Forms: acuminous, acuminate, acumination  Antonym Form: unacuminous

adroit: (adj) highly skilled, especially with one’s hands
The adroit mechanic was able to fix Addy’s old car, even though six other mechanics said it couldn’t be repaired.
Word Forms: adroitly, adroitness

aerie: (n) a nest; a home high on a mountain
Our aerie atop Roan Mountain was a cozy escape from the hustle and bustle of city life.
Related Word: aerial

aesthetic: (adj) relating to beauty
Alaina chose this church because of its aesthetic qualities; it was the most beautiful wedding chapel she had ever
seen.
Word Forms: aesthetically, aesthetics (n.), aestheticize, aesthete, aesthetician Antonym Form: unaesthetic

affable: (adj) friendly
In the fable, the affable princess was adored by all except for her three stepsisters who were angered by her
friendliness.
Word Forms: affably, affability, affableness Antonym Forms: inaffable, inaffibility

affected: (adj) fake; phony
Afton had never traveled outside of the United States, but he used an affected French accent to attract attention.
Word Forms: affectedly, affectedness

aggrandize: (vb) increase in size
Agatha, an avid baseball enthusiast, used her inheritance to aggrandize her collection of baseball cards.
Word Forms: aggrandizement, aggrandizer, aggrandizable Related Words: aggrade, grand

alacrity: (n) liveliness and eagerness
Alaina impressed her new boss by accepting the task with alacrity; she was both eager and excited to get started.
Word Form: alacritous

alchemy: (n) magical power; process of turning base metals into goldRelated:
Al uses alchemy in the kitchen, turning simple ingredients into delicious culinary works of art.
Word Forms: alchemic, alchemical, alchemistic, alchemistical, alchemically, alchemist, alchemistry
chemistry

amalgamation: (n) a combination
Amy’s new dance routine is an amalgamation of styles, including ballet and jazz.
Word Forms: amalgam, amalgamate, amalgamable, amalgamative, amalgamator

ameliorate: (vb) to make better
Amelia was an outstanding caregiver; she could ameliorate a patient’s discomfort just by smiling kindly.
Word Forms: ameliorable, ameliorableness, ameliorant, ameliorative, amelioratory, ameliorator

amenable: (adj) agreeable
Amy was amenable to changing my schedule at work so that I could attend my son's baseball games.
Word Forms: amenability, amenableness, amenably Antonym Forms: nonamenable, nonamenability,
nonamenableness

amiable: (adj) friendly
The amiable celebrity was known for his willingness to sign autographs and visit with his fans.
Word Forms: amiably, amiability, amiableness Antonym Form: unamiable Related Word: amicable

amortize: (vb) to eliminate debt by making paymentsAntonym Forms: unamortized
For most borrowers, it takes thirty years to amortize their mortgage.
Word Forms: amortized, amortizable, amortizement, amortization

amulet: (n) magical charm to ward off evil
Amos placed a small amulet in his pocket, a charm that he believed helped him advance to the state tennis finals.
Word Form: amuletic

anachronistic: (adj) out of chronological order
Today’s announcement about the impending demolition of the baseball stadium is anachronistic; the stadium was
razed early last week.
Word Forms: anachronistically, anachrony, anachronic, anachronism, anachronous, anachronously
Related Word: chronological, chronology

analgesic: (adj) capable of relieving pain
Although Andy was in the most painful stages of the disease, his daughter’s visit was analgesic; he was so happy to
see her that his pain was significantly reduced.
Word Forms: analgesic (n.), analgetic Related Word: analgesia

anodyne: (n) something that relieves pain
The comedy club was an anodyne to Annika's grief; while she was there, she could forget her pain and sadness.
Word Form: anodynic

anthropocentrism: (n) theory that regards humans as the central element of the universe
People who support the theory of anthropocentrism have a difficult time believing in intelligent life on other planets.
Word Forms: anthropocentric, anthropocentrically, anthropocentricityRelated Word: anthropology

antipathy: (n) strong dislike
Antonio's antipathy for reporters stemmed from his childhood, when journalists hassled him about his father's trial.
Word Forms: antipathist, antipathize, antipathic Related Words: sympathy, empathy, apathy

apathy: (n) an absence of emotion or enthusiasm
The teacher was disappointed in the students’ apathy toward the field trip; she had mistakenly believed that this trip
would finally excite them about learning.
Word Forms: apathetic, apathetical, apathetically, apathist Related Words: sympathy, empathy, antipathy

apocryphal: (adj) fake; untrue
April told an apocryphal tale about my mother; I wanted so much to believe it even though I knew it wasn't true.
Word Forms: apocryphally, apocryphalness, apocryphalist

apostate: (n) person who abandons their religion or cause
I had been an apostate from my religion for years, but recently had started thinking about rejoining the church.
Word Forms: apostatic, apostatical, apostatically, apostasy, apostatize

approbation: (n) approval
Apollo's proposal for new lighting on campus was met with approbation, as the board agreed there was a safety
issue.
Word Forms: approbate, approbative, approbator, approbatory Related Word: preapprobation, subapprobation

archaic: (adj) so extremely old as seeming to belong to an earlier period
The college cannot have sorority or fraternity houses because of an archaic town law that does not allow unmarried
people to live together.
Word Forms: archaically, archaism, archaistic, archaist Related Word: archaeology

ardor: (n) intense passion
Mrs. Armstrong, my English teacher, is known for her ardor for the literature of William Faulkner; last summer she
even visited his hometown in Mississippi in order to better visualize the settings of his books.

arrogate: (vb) to claim without rights
The government arrogated Arianna's land, so she hired a lawyer to prove it did not have any rights to her property.
Word Forms: arrogatingly, arrogation, arrogator, arrogative Antonym Forms: unarrogated, unarrogating

ascertain: (vb) to make certain
The detective was able to ascertain the suspect’s whereabouts on the night of the burglary through surveillance
video.
Word Forms: ascertainable, ascertainableness, ascertainably, ascertainment, ascertainer

ascetic: (n) a person who practices self-denial as a spiritual discipline
To prove his devotion to the religion, the ascetic did not own anything that might provide comfort or pleasure, such
as a mattress or television set.
Word Forms: ascetic (adj.), ascetical, ascetically, asceticism

assail: (vb) to attack
Asa was determined to master the GRE Verbal Reasoning section, so she assailed vocabulary words with
determination.
Word Forms: assailable, assailableness, assailer, assailment, assailant Antonym Form: unassailed

assiduous: (adj) constant and attentive
Ashley is an assiduous researcher; she was able to find articles on the poet that even the librarian could not locate.
Word Forms: assiduously, assiduousness, assiduity

assuage: (vb) to relieve or ease
The shoplifter assuaged his guilt by confessing to the crime.
Word Forms: assuagement, assuager Antonym Forms: unassuaged, unassuaging

attenuate: (vb) to weaken
Atticus' muscles slowly attenuated when he quit working out at the gym.
Word Forms: attenuation, attenuator, attenuatedly Antonym Forms: unattenuated, unattenuatedly
Related Words: overattenuate, subattenuate, tenuous

audacious: (adj) bold and fearless
Audrey asked audacious questions that most people would be scared to ask.
Word Forms: audaciously, audaciousness, audacity Antonym Forms: unaudacious, unaudaciously,
unaudaciousness

augment: (vb) to enlarge or increase
In an effort to augment her paper on William Faulkner, Aubrey added three pages about the author’s childhood.
Word Forms: augmentation, augmentable, augmentative, augmentatively, augmenter

augury: (n) divine prediction
Augustus believed the groundhog's shadow was an augury of a delayed springtime.
Word Forms: augural, augurate, auguration, augur

august: (adj) noble and dignified
The august king was admired for his good work.
Word Forms: augustly, augustness

auspicious: (adj) favorable; fortunate
Austin waited for an auspicious time to ask his father to borrow the car; he finally had his chance on the day that his
dad received a sizable raise at work.
Word Forms: auspiciously, auspiciousness

austere: (adj) 1. strict; disciplined; serious 2. simple; undecorated
Mr. Aston is the most austere teacher at school; he does not tolerate any talking nor does he accept late assignments.
Word Forms: austerely, austereness, austerity

autonomy: (n) independence
The Confederate states fought to gain autonomy from the Union during the Civil War.
Word Forms: autonomous, autonomously, autonomist

avarice: (n) extreme greed for material wealth
Avery amassed million-dollar homes, luxury cars, and exquisite jewelry to satisfy her avarice, but still wanted more.
Word Forms: avaricious, avariciously, avariciousness

avuncular: (adj) resembling an uncle in kindness or indulgence
Mr. Avery developed an avuncular affection for his neighbor’s children after having spent so many years next door.
Word Forms: avuncularly, avuncularity Related Word: uncle

axiom: (n) principle or ruleAntonym Forms: nonaxiomatic, nonaxiomatical,
The golden rule is a good axiom to live by.
Word Forms: axiomatic, axiomatical, axiomatization
unaxiomatic

banal: (adj) repeated too often; overfamiliar through overuse
The plot of the movie is banal; everything that takes place in this film has happened in a dozen other movies.
Word Forms: banally, banalize, banality

belfry: (n) a bell tower
No one volunteered to clean out the belfry because of all the bats that live in it.

benevolent: (adj) charitable; kind
The benevolent nun spent her entire life working with the poor.
Word Forms: benevolently, benevolentness, benevolence Related Words: benefactor, benefit

bevy: (n) a large group
The picnic lunch on the beach attracted a bevy of birds.

bifurcate: (vb) to divide into two branches
Biff's family tree bifurcated in 1946 when his grandmother remarried, thus creating a second branch of relatives.
Word Forms: bifurcately, bifurcation, bifurcous Related Word: fork

bilk: (vb) to cheat or swindle
Bill was bilked out of $10,000 when he invested in the phony scheme.
Word Form: bilker

blight: (n) any factor that causes decay or deterioration
The blight that killed Blake's corn was responsible for the destruction of crops throughout the county.
Word Form: blightinglyAntonym Forms: unblighted, unblightedly, unblightedness

blithe: (adj) cheerful
Blythe was know for her blithe spirit; she was always happy and cheerful.
Word Forms: blitheful, blithefullly, blithely, blitheness, blithesome Related Word: overblithe

bombast: (n) pompous or pretentious talk or writing
Be sure that your speech isn’t pretentious or inflated, as the audience has no time to listen to bombast.
Word Forms: bombastic, bombastically, bombaster

bonhomie: (n) friendliness
Bonnie had many friends who admired her kind nature and bonhomie.
Word Form: bonhomous

boor: (n) a person who is rude, clumsy, and lacking social manners
Boris was a boor at the dinner party; after telling the host that her house was cheaply decorated, he ate his steak
with his fingers and burped during the meal.
Word Forms: boorish, boorishly, boorishness
Note: Be careful not to confuse a boor (a rude person) with a bore (a boring person).

bromide: (n) a common saying
As true as the old bromides are, such as “It is better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all,” none of
them are much comfort to a newly-broken heart.
Word Forms: bromidic, bromidically

bucolic: (adj) relating to country life; rural
The farmer lived a bucolic lifestyle, rising with the sun to tend the farm and retiring at sundown.
Word Forms: bucolical, bucolically

burgeon: (vb) to flourish
Under the mayor's direction, the quiet town burgeoned into an active city.

burnish: (vb) to polish
In preparation for his dinner party, Bernie burnished the silverware and serving platters.
Word Forms: burnishable, burnishment, burnisher Antonym Form: unburnished

byzantine: (adj) highly complex or intricate
In a home loan, the byzantine language and unfamiliar terminology can be intimidating to a first-time home buyer.

cabal: (n) a secret group of plotters or schemers
The cabal met in a church basement to plan the overthrow of the government.
Word Form: caballer Related Word: cabala

cacophony: (n) harsh, jarring sound
On the first day of school, the band’s output was a cacophony of trumpets and horns; however, by the end of the year,
the horn section blended well with the rest of the ensemble.
Word Forms: cacophonic, cacophonous, cacophonously

cajole: (vb) to influence by gentle urging, caressing, or flattering
Caleb cajoled his mother into letting him borrow the car by telling her how young and pretty she looked today.
Word Forms: cajolement, cajolingly, cajolery, cajoler

callous: (adj) insensitive; emotionally hardened
The senator’s callous indifference to the suffering of the people in the war-torn country cost him reelection.
Word Forms: callously, callousness Related Word: callus

calumny: (n) a false statement intended to harm someone’s reputation
Callie delivered the calumny about Brittany to an audience in the cafeteria; she hoped the lie would keep the other
girl from becoming Prom queen.
Word Forms: calumniate, calumniation, calumnious, calumniously, calumniatory, calumniator

canard: (n) false story or rumor
The belief that Napoleon was short is a canard; he was actually 5'7", an above average height for a Frenchman in
1800.

canonical: (adj) authorized or accepted
Pluto is no longer a canonical planet; due to its small mass, it was reclassified as a “dwarf planet” in 2006.
Word Forms: canonically, canon, canonic Antonym Forms: uncanonical, uncanonically

cantankerous: (adj) ill-tempered and unwilling to cooperate
The cantankerous old man took the little boy’s sucker and refused to give it back.
Word Forms: cantankerously, cantankerousness

capricious: (adj) apt to change suddenly
Cane’s capricious personality made him a fun friend but a terrible boss; social spontaneity was exciting but
workplace unpredictability was frustrating.
Word Forms: capriciously, capriciousness, caprice

cartographer: (n) a person who makes maps
Amerigo Vespucci was one of the first cartographers to create a map of North America.
Word Forms: cartography, cartograph, cartographic, cartographical, cartographically

castigate: (vb) to criticize or punish severely
Cassie was castigated by her parents and the school principal for her role in the cheating scam.
Word Forms: castigation, castigative, castigatory, castigator

cataclysm: (n) a violent upheaval
The political uprising against the dictator is a cataclysm that will hopefully result in a more democratic regime.
Word Forms: cataclysmic, cataclysmically, cataclysmal Related Word: catastrophe

cathartic: (adj) inducing a release of tense emotions
Painting was a cathartic exercise for Cathy; through her paintings she was able to release anger and fear.
Word Forms: cathartically, catharticalness

catholic: (adj) universal; liberal
Cathy had very catholic tastes, enjoying a wide array of food and drink.
Word Forms: catholically, catholicly, catholicalness, catholicness

caustic: (adj) burning or stinging
Cosette's caustic remark stung Kent; he could handle criticism about his job, but her bitter words were personal.
Word Forms: caustically, causticly, causticness, causticity

cavalier: (n) a man who is chivalrous and gallant
The young cavalier was rewarded for his gallant behavior when he was chosen to escort the princess to the ball.
Word Forms: cavalier (adj.), cavalierly, cavalierness, cavalierism

censure: (n) strong disapproval
High school teachers voiced their censure of the new novel due to mature themes and profanity.
Word Forms: censurer, censureless Related Words: miscensure, precensure, procensure

charlatan: (n) a person who falsely claims to possess skills or knowledge; an imposter
The charlatan tricked the unsuspecting customers out of money by pretending to be able to predict the future.
Word Forms: charlatanic, charlatanish, charlatanical, charlatanically, charlatanistic, charlatanry, charlatanism

chary: (adj) cautious; timid; choosy
Charlie was chary of sitting on the wobbly chair; he was afraid it would break under his weight.
Word Form: charily  Antonym Form: unchary

chicanery: (n) the use of tricks to deceive someone
The con artist relied on chicanery to get his victims to reveal their Social Security numbers; he promised them a
tropical vacation for simply listing their personal information.
Word Forms: chicane, chicaner

churlish: (adj) rude and vulgar
Cheryl did not think the man’s churlish jokes were appropriate, and asked that he apologize for his vulgarity.
Word Forms: churlishly, churlishness, churl

circumlocution: (n) an indirect way of expressing something
Sergio hoped that his circumlocution would stall the reporters long enough to think of a better answer to their
question.
Word Forms: circumlocutory, circumlocutorily, circumlocutional, circumlocutionary

circumscribed: (adj) restricted
Her driving privileges are circumscribed by the state; she is only allowed to drive at night if she is returning from
work.
Word Forms: circumscribable, circumscriber Related Word: circle

circumspect: (adj) cautious; discreet
Given the recent theft of passwords, you need to be circumspect when sharing personal information on the internet.
Word Forms: circumspectly, circumspectness Antonym Forms: noncircumspect, noncircumspectly,
noncircumspectness

clandestine: (adj) secret
The school administrators held clandestine meetings about the school uniform policy; they were afraid that if the
public knew they were contemplating a new policy, the outcry would squash the issue.
Word Forms: clandestinely, clandestineness, clandestinity

cloying: (adj) wearying through excess
Her perfume smelled sweet at first but became cloying after sitting in the car with her for an hour.
Word Forms: cloy, cloyinglyAntonym Form: uncloying

coalesce: (vb) to blend into one  Antonym Forms: noncoalescence, noncoalescent
The two streams coalesced into a river.
Word Forms: coalescence, coalescent

coffer: (n) a box for storing valuables; funds
Keifer depleted the organizations coffers, but his plan was to replenish the funds.
Word Form: cofferlike

cogent: (adj) convincing; telling
Craig presents a cogent argument through sound evidence and logical conclusions.
Word Forms: cogency, cogentlyAntonym Form: noncogent, noncogently, uncogent, uncogently

collusion: (n) a secret agreement; conspiracyRelated Word:
The founding fathers worked in collusion to revolt against the British government.
Word Forms: collusive, collusively, collusory Antonym Forms: noncollusion, noncollusive
collude

conciliate: (vb) to win over; to make peace
The manager was able to conciliate the angry customer by offering her a fifty dollar gift certificate.
Word Forms: conciliable, conciliation, conciliatory, conciliatorily, conciliatoriness Related Word: reconcile

concomitant: (adj) existing or occurring at the same time
Building a home can be an exciting process, but it also has concomitant stress associated with difficult decisions.
Word Forms: concomitant (n.), concomitantly, concomitance

conflagration: (n) a destructive fire
The fire department determined that the conflagration in the old warehouse was a result of faulty wiring.
Word Forms: conflagrative, conflagrate, conflagrant

conspicuous: (adj) obvious
The realtor put the “For Sale” sign in a conspicuous spot in the front yard so that people in traffic could easily see it.
Word Forms: conspicuously, conspicuousness, conspicuity
Antonym Forms: inconspicuous, inconspicuously, inconspicuousness

consummate: (adj) perfect and complete
Constantine is the consummate host; he greets his guests, makes sure they are comfortable and enjoying themselves,
and introduces new friends to everyone.
Word Forms: consummate (vb.), consummately, consummatory, consummation, consummator

contrite: (adj) feeling guilty and remorseful
The contrite criminal broke into sobs as he apologized to the victim’s family for the suffering he had caused.
Word Forms: contritely, contriteness, contrition

contumacious: (adj) willfully disobedient
The contumacious convict spat at the judge and refused to acknowledge his sentence.
Word Forms: contumaciously, contumaciousness, contumacity Antonym Form: noncontumacious,
noncontumaciously, noncontumaciousness Related Words: contumely, contumelious, contumeliously,
contumliousness

convoluted: (adj) complicated
Connor was unable to finish the seventeenth-century novel due to the convoluted language of the period.
Word Forms: convolutedly, convolutedness Related Word: involuted

corpulent: (adj) excessively fat
The corpulent man purchased two adjacent airline seats in order to have a more comfortable flight.
Word Forms: corpulently, corpulence, corpulency

corroborate: (vb) to confirm or support with evidence
Coral’s thesis was corroborated by three supporting paragraphs, each presenting an example that proved her main
idea.
Word Forms: corroborated, corroboration, corroborative, corroboratively, corroboratory, corroborant, corroborator
Antonym Form: uncorroborated

cosset: (vb) to pamper
Cossette cosseted the puppy, providing him with diamond collars, caviar dinners, and doggy massages.
Word Form: cosseted  Antonym Form: uncosseted

coterie: (n) an exclusive group of people; a clique
The town's wealthiest socialites formed a coterie and few people were able to gain entrance to the circle.

craven: (adj) cowardly
Rather than face her landlord and explain the damage to the house, the craven tenant packed up and moved in the
night.
Word Forms: craven (n), cravenly, cravennessAntonym Form: uncraven

crescendo: (n) peak of growth
The cheers in the audience reached a crescendo when the concert headliner was introduced.
Antonym Form: decrescendoRelated Word: crescent

culpable: (adj) worthy of blame
The jury found the suspect culpable for the break-ins.
Word Forms: culpability, culpableness, culpably Antonym Form: nonculpable, nonculpableness, nonculpably
Related Word: exculpate, culprit

cumbersome: (adj) clumsy, awkward, and heavy
The old television set was cumbersome, making it difficult to move into the other room.
Word Forms: cumbersomely, cumbersomeness Related Words: cumber, encumber

cupidity: (n) excessive greed
Cullen's downfall was his cupidity; he couldn't walk away with the money he had already embezzled and was caught
when he went back for more.
Word Form: cupidinous

curmudgeon: (n) cranky, difficult person
The old curmudgeon complained about every part of his meal.
Word Form: curmudgeonly  Related Word: cur

cynical: (adj) distrusting and pessimistic
Cyndi’s cynical attitude made it hard for her to believe in anyone’s good intentions.
Word Forms: cynically, cynicism, cynic

dalliance: (n) the deliberate act of delaying and playing instead of working
Dalton’s dalliance at the basketball court kept him from working on the term paper that was due tomorrow.
Word Forms: dally, dallyingly, dallier Related Word: dilly-dally

daunt: (vb) to cause to lose courage
Don had finally worked up the courage to ride the roller coaster when he was daunted by the pale faces of the riders
who had just completed the ride.
Word Forms: dauntingly, dauntingness Antonym Forms: dauntless, dauntlessly, dauntlessness, undaunted,
undauntedly

dearth: (n) a lack in supply
During the Second World War, the dearth of male baseball players led to the creation of a women’s baseball league.

debunk: (vb) to prove untrue
The reporter debunked the urban legend about the witch in the woods by revealing wild goats as the sources of the
noises.
Word Form: debunker

debutante: (n) a young woman making her debut into society
The debutantes were introduced at a formal ball, after which they were considered members of the aristocratic
society.

declivity: (n) a downward slope
The backyard's declivity caused rainwater to wash down it, creating a pool of standing water at the bottom of the
slope.
Word Forms: declivitous, declivous, declivent  Antonym Form: acclivity

decorous: (adj) proper and dignified
The decorous host made sure that she had proper table settings; each was arranged correctly for the five-course
meal.
Word Forms: decorously, decorousness Antonym Forms: indecorous, indecorously, indecorousness
Related Word: decorum

deject: (vb) to lower someone’s spirits; make downhearted
The news of her father’s declining condition dejected Denise, as she had been sure his health was starting to
improve.
Word Forms: dejected (adj.), dejectedly, dejectedness, dejectory, dejection Related Words: reject, eject

deleterious: (adj) harmful
The deleterious effects of cigarette smoking, such as lung cancer, are highlighted in the public service campaign.
Word Forms: deleteriously, deleteriousness Related Word: delete

delineate: (vb) to outline
In her speech, Delilah clearly delineated her plans for changing several policies should she be elected class
president.
Word Forms: delineable, delineative, delineation, delineament, delineatory, delineator Antonym Form:
undelineated

demagogue: (n) a political leader who seeks support by appealing to popular passions and prejudices
Hitler was a demagogue who gained power by exploiting religious prejudices in Germany.
Word Forms: demagoguery, demagogism, demagogic, demagogical, demagogically

demarcate: (vb) to set, mark, or draw the boundaries of something
The twins demarcated the room after their fight; Demarcus was only allowed access to the right side of their room,
while Demonte had to stay on the left side.
Word Forms: demarcation, demarcator

demur: (vb) to object
I was surprised when my father did not demur to me attending the rival college of his alma mater.
Word Forms: demurrable, demurral, demurrerAntonym Form: undemurring

denigrate: (vb) to damage the reputation of
The candidate hoped to denigrate his opponent’s character by exposing the embezzlement scandal.
Word Forms: denigration, denigrative, denigratory, denigrator

derelict: (n) a person without a home, job, or property
The derelict spent his days begging on the street corner and his nights sleeping in the alley.
Word Forms: derelict (adj.), derelictly, derelictness, dereliction Related Word: relinquish

deride: (vb) to ridicule
The unsupportive team captain derided Desiree’s attempts to make the volleyball squad.
Word Forms: deridingly, derision, derisive, derisible, derider

derivative: (n) something that came from an original
The Pilates exercise system is a derivative of the ancient Indian practice of yoga.
Word Forms: derivative (adj.), derivatively, derivativeness, derive, derivation

desiccate: (vb) to dry up
When the flowers in my bouquet desiccate, I can preserve them as dried flowers.
Word Forms: desiccation, desiccative, desiccated, desiccator

despoiler: (n) a person who steals goods
The despoilers from the pirate ship stripped the village members of all their possessions.
Word Forms: despoil, despoilment Related Word: spoils (n.)

despot: (n) a ruler with complete power
The despot was a harsh ruler who imposed outrageous taxes and unreasonable upon against his subjects.
Word Forms: despotic, despotical, despotically, despotism

destitute: (adj) completely wanting or lacking (usually money, food, and shelter)
The homeless man wasn’t always destitute; he once had a job, but poor money management led to bankruptcy.
Word Forms: destitutely, destituteness, destitution

desultory: (adj) disconnected and random
People wondered about Desiree's mental state when her conversation turned desultory; she jumped from topic to
topic with seemingly no connection.
Word Forms: desultorily, desultoriness, desultorious

diaphanous: (adj) sheer; nearly translucent
Daphne would be wise to wear a slip under that diaphanous skirt.
Word Forms: diaphanously, diaphanousness, diaphaneity Antonym Forms: nondiaphanous, nondiaphanously

diatribe: (n) bitter criticism; verbal attack
It was clear from Diana's diatribes against her mother that their relationship was beyond repair.
Word Form: diatribist

dictum: (n) a formal statement
The president released a dictum forbidding texting while at work.

didactic: (adj) educational
The children’s book is not only entertaining, but also didactic; the story teaches the dietary habits of marine animals.
Word Forms: didactical, didactically, didacticism, didact Related Words: autodidactic, autodidact

diffident: (adj) shy; reserved
Daphne was diffident when she first made the team, but by the end of the season, she was clearly a leader on the
court.
Word Forms: diffidently, diffidenness, diffidence  Antonym Forms: nondiffident, nondiffidently, undiffident

dilatory: (adj) intending to delay
Dillon asked nearly twenty dilatory questions at the start of class in an attempt to postpone the scheduled math test.
Word Forms: dilatorily, dilatoriness Related Word: delay

dilettante: (n) a person who engages in an activity (such as art) without serious intentions or inquiry
Although Dylan started painting, he was merely a dilettante; his paintings were amateur attempts at a part-time
hobby.
Word Forms: dilettantish, dilettanteism

dirge: (n) a funeral song
As the dirge played, mournful cries could be heard throughout the funeral.
Word Forms: dirgeful

disabuse: (vb) to free someone from false ideas
Dixon believed tomatoes were vegetables but I disabused him of that idea when I revealed they are actually fruits.
Word Form: disabusal

discern: (vb) to perceive or understand with sight or other senses
The captain discerned another ship in the fog.
Word Forms: discernible, discernibly, discernment, discernibility, discernableness, discerner
Antonym Forms: indiscernible, indiscernibly, indiscernibility, indiscernibleness

disdain: (n) a lack of respect accompanied by a feeling of intense dislike
The suspect was looked upon with disdain by the detectives who investigated the terrible crime.
Word Forms: disdain (vb.), disdainful, disdainfully, disdainfulness Related Word: deign

disenfranchise: (vb) to deprive of voting rights
American citizens who are convicted of a felony are disenfranchised, losing their right to vote in any election.
Word Forms: disenfranchisement, disfranchise Antonym Forms: enfranchise, franchise

disillusion: (vb) to free from false beliefs
As a young politician, Dane believed he could stop the corruption that ran through the county government, but he
was quickly disillusioned by the extent of the illegal activity.
Word Forms: disillusionment, disillusive, disillusionize, disillusionist

disingenuous: (adj) insincere
Denise’s disingenuous apology was just an attempt to get out of her punishment; she was not truly sorry for going to
the concert without permission.
Word Forms: disingenuously, disingenuousness, disingenuity Antonym Forms: ingenuous, ingenuously,
ingenuousness
Related Word: genuine

disparage: (vb) to belittle or criticize
My mom’s feelings were hurt when I disparaged her cooking skills.
Word Forms: disparagement, disparaging (adj.), disparagingly, disparager

disparate: (adj) different and distinct
The mixture of three disparate styles—jazz, rock, and country—created a unique sound and a diverse audience.
Word Forms: disparately, disparateness Related Word: disparity

dissembler: (n) a person who conceals his real feelings by professing false beliefs
The dissembler pledged allegiance to the rebel group, but he was really working undercover for the opposing army.
Word Forms: dissemble, dissemblingly, dissemblance Related Words: resemble, semblance

disseminate: (vb) to spread widely
The police hoped the information about the suspect would disseminate quickly; the more people who knew, the better
chances of apprehending the wanted man.
Word Forms: dissemination, disseminative, disseminator

dissonance: (n) harsh, jarring sound
On the first day of school, the band’s output was a dissonance of trumpets and horns; however, by the end of the
year, the horn section blended well with the rest of the ensemble.
Word Form: dissonancy  Antonym Form: consonance Related Words: assonance, resonance

distaff: (n) the female part of a family
Driving skills clearly fell on the distaff side of the family; the ladies had clean driving records but the men had
sixteen traffic tickets among them.

dither: (vb) to be indecisive
Dillon dithered on whether to go to business school or law school.
Word Forms: ditherer, dithery

diurnal: (adj) daily; daytime
Humans are diurnal creatures, so working the night shift can disrupt our natural sleep rhythms.
Word Forms: diurnally, diurnalness Antonym Forms: undiurnal, undiurnally Related Word: nocturnal

divert: (vb) to turn away from a course
Traffic was diverted through side streets in order to avoid an accident on the main road.
Word Forms: divertedly, diversion, divertible Related Words: invert, convert, revert

divine: (vb) to predict using supernatural means Related Word: divine (adj)
Devina asked the psychic to divine her future using the crystal ball.
Word Forms: divinable, divinely, divineness, divination, divinator

doctrinaire: (adj) impractical; insistent about one's own theory
The doctor believed that the lack of exercise was the single cause of high blood pressure and was doctrinaire in his
inability to accept genetic factors.
Word Forms: doctrinaire (n), doctrinairism  Antonym Forms: nondoctrinaire, undoctrinaire

dogmatic: (adj) characterized by assertion of unproved or unprovable principles
The dogmatic scientist continued to publish his theory, despite the fact that it was unproven.
Word Forms: dogmatically, dogmaticalness, dogmatize, dogmatism, dogmatist Related Words: dogma

draconian: (adj) harsh and severe
In the novel, the king used draconian forms of punishment—such as torture or starvation—on any one caught
plotting against the monarchy.
Word Forms: draconic, draconically

droll: (adj) amusing; comical
The droll little man amused the children with his odd gait and his quaint way of speaking.
Word Forms: drollness, drolly, drollery

dubious: (adj) doubtful; questionableRelated Word:
The candidate’s dubious past came back to haunt her in the election.
Word Forms: dubiously, dubiousness, dubitable Antonym Forms: indubious, indubiously
doubt

dupe: (vb) to deceiveAntonym Form: undupable
Dupree was duped into investing in the scam.
Word Forms: dupe (n), dupable, dupability, duper, dupery

dyspeptic: (adj) irritable and gloomy
Dyson was dyspeptic about his acceptance into business school; everyone tried to cheer him up, but he was
convinced he would be rejected.
Word Forms: dyspepticallyAntonym Forms: nondyspeptic, nondyspeptical, nondyspeptically

earnest: (adj) serious; sincere
The earnest student took the SAT seriously; he bought several study guides, and dedicated two hours a day to
practice.
Word Forms: earnestly, earnestness

ebullient: (adj) extremely excited or enthusiastic
The ebullient child clapped her hands and jumped up and down as she waited to ride the pony at the party.
Word Forms: ebulliently, ebullience

eclectic: (adj) made up of choices from diverse sources
Mrs. Eckert has an eclectic music collection; her albums span from classic jazz to hip hop to disco.
Word Forms: eclectically, eclecticist Related Word: select

edify: (vb) to benefit by instruction
The art teacher edified his students by taking them to a premier art gallery to teach about painting techniques.
Word Forms: edifier, edifyingly, edifying, reedify  Antonym Forms: nonedified, unedified

efficacious: (adj) effective
The pest repellent was efficacious in keeping the mosquitoes away; none of the guests were bothered by the bugs.
Word Forms: efficaciously, efficaciousness, efficacy, efficacity
Antonym Forms: inefficacious, inefficaciously, inefficaciousness, inefficacy, inefficacity
Related Words: effect, effective

effigy: (n) a representation of someone
The mayor's effigy was unveiled as a sculpture in the park, erected to honor his lifelong service.
Word Form: effigial

effrontery: (n) shameless boldness
She had the effrontery to imply that I was pregnant when in fact I had just gained some weight.

effusive: (adj) excessive enthusiasm or emotion
Effie’s effusive praise was so excessive and over-the-top that it almost seemed insincere.
Word Forms: effusively, effusiveness Related Words: effuse, infuse

egalitarian: (adj) characterized by the belief in equal rights for all people
Edgar’s egalitarian beliefs made him an excellent husband; he divided the housework equally, helping his wife with
cooking, cleaning, and childcare.
Word Forms: egalitarian (n.), egalitarianism, egality Related Word: equality

egregious: (adj) outrageously bad or offensive
Edie made the egregious mistake of asking the slightly overweight woman if she were expecting a baby.
Word Forms: egregiously, egregiousness

elegy: (n) a sad poem or song
"To An Athlete Dying Young" is a heartbreaking elegy written by A. E. Housman.
Word Forms: elegize, elegist

elicit: (vb) to call or bring out
The woman elicits sympathy from her audience by telling the story of her difficult childhood.
Word Forms: elicitation, elicitor Related Word: solicit
Note: elicit is often confused with illicit, which means illegal

eloquent: (adj) expressing oneself powerfully and effectively
The minister’s eloquent sermon stirred the members of the church.
Word Forms: eloquently, eloquence Antonym Forms: ineloquent, ineloquently, ineloquence

elucidate: (vb) to make clear by explanation
The story in the newspaper elucidated some of the details of the mystery that had previously raised questions.
Word Forms: elucidation, elucidative, elucidatory, elucidator Related Word: lucid

embroil: (vb) to bring into an argument or negative situation
Emory is embroiled in a lawsuit with his former landlord over the condition of the apartment when he moved out.
Word Forms: embroilment, embroiler

eminent: (adj) distinguished and prominent
The eminent professor has taught at distinguished colleges, which is why he is such a remarkable addition to the
faculty.
Word Forms: eminently, eminence Note: eminent is often confused with imminent, which means about to occur

emissary: (n) a person sent on a mission to represent the interests of someone else
The general sent an emissary to the enemy’s camp to inquire about the terms of surrender.
Related Words: emission, emissive, emit

emollient: (n) that which has a softening or soothing effect, especially to the skin
Emmaline applied an emollient lotion to the rough calluses on her hands.
Word Form: emollient (adj.), emollience

empirical: (adj) resulting from an experiment
As a scientist, Emmie relied on empirical data every day, which is why it was hard for her to trust her intuition.
Word Forms: empirically, empiricalness

emulate: (vb) to imitate in order to match or excel
Emily hoped to emulate her older sister’s success on the tennis court.
Word Forms: emulative, emulatively, emulation, emulator

encomium: (n) high praise
The chairwoman delivered an encomium about Enzo before introducing him as the employee of the month.
Word Form: encomia

endemic: (adj) natural to a local area
Fire ants are endemic to the southeastern coastal plains, but they have started to migrate to the interior.
Word Forms: endemically, endemism Antonym Forms: nonendemic, unendemic Related Words: epidemic,
pandemic

enervated: (adj) lacking strength or vigor
After an entire weekend of moving furniture, Enrico was enervated; he would need to rest to get his strength back.
Word Forms: enervate (vb.), enervation, enervative, enervator

engender: (vb) to produce
Divorce can engender feelings of anger, loss, and powerlessness.
Word Forms: engenderer, engendermentAntonym Form: unengendered Related Word: generate

enigma: (n) a puzzle
The dog’s escape from the pen is an enigma; no one can figure out how she broke out of the locked enclosure.
Word Forms: enigmata (plural), enigmatic, enigmatical, enigmatically

ennui: (n) boredom
The monotony of my job produces utter ennui.

enumerate: (vb) to count; to name one by one
The blog enumerated the top five study tips for the GRE.
Word Forms: enumerative, enumerator, enumerable Antonym Forms: nonenumerated, nonenumerative
Related Words: numeral, number

ephemeral: (adj) lasting a very short time
Effie’s sadness over her breakup is ephemeral; she will quickly find a new boyfriend to help her forget the last.
Word Forms: ephemeral (n.), ephemerally, ephemeralness, ephemerality, ephemerous, ephemeron

epicure: (n) a person with refined tastes, particularly of food and wine
The reality show features several epicures judging the cooking skills of America's best chefs.
Word Forms: epicurean, epicureous, epicurism

epistolary: (adj) relating to letters
The couple has an epistolary relationship; although they have never met, they communicate regularly through letters.
Word Forms: epistle, epistolatory, epistolic, epistolical, epistolize, epistoler, epistolist

equanimity: (n) steadiness of mind under stress
Eva made an excellent emergency room doctor because she handled trauma with equanimity; she was clear-headed
during the most stressful situations.
Word Forms: equanimous, equanimously, equanimousness Related Word: longanimity

equivocal: (adj) uncertain; open to multiple interpretations
The politician’s equivocal statement about the environment could support either side of the issue.
Word Forms: equivocality, equivocacy, equivocally, equivocalness
Antonym Forms: unequivocal, unequivocally, unequivocalness

ersatz: (adj) artificial; serving to substitute
Aspertame is an ersatz sugar that has caused a lot of controversy in recent years.

erudition: (n) knowledge gained from study
Erik’s erudition is sure to help him win a lot of money on the trivia-based quiz show.
Word Forms: eruditional, erudite, eruditely, eruditeness

eschew: (vb) to avoid; to shun
Attempting to follow a low carb diet, Essie eschewed all foods containing sugar.
Word Forms: eschewal, eschewer Antonym Form: uneschewed

esoteric: (adj) intended for a select group of people; secret or confidential
Esteban was a member of an esoteric club, whose membership consisted strictly of men over fifty who lived in the
city.
Word Forms: esoterically, esotericism, esotericist Antonym Forms: exoteric, exoterically, exotericism

espouse: (vb) to adopt or marry (such as an idea or cause)
Although Esmerelda had never practiced a formal religion, she espoused her fiancé’s faith in order to join his
church.
Word Forms: espousal, espouser Related Word: spouse

ethos: (n) the spirit or attitude of a group
The ethos of 4-H is education resulting in positive change for the community.

eulogy: (n) a formal expression of praise (often delivered at funerals)
The director delivered a eulogy about the center’s most helpful volunteer, praising her for helping the needy.
Word Forms: eulogize, eulogist

euphemism: (n) an inoffensive word or phrase used in place of one that is hurtful or harsh
In the hospital's yearly report, the euphemism "negative patient outcome" is used instead of "death."
Word Forms: euphemistic, euphemistically, euphemist, euphemistical, euphemious, euphemously, euphemize
Antonym Forms: uneuphemistic, uneuphemistical

euphony: (n) pleasant sound
When the orchestra started to play, a euphony ensued that made audience members smile.
Word Forms: euphonize, euphonious, euphoniously, euphoniousness
Antonym Forms: noneuphonious, noneuphoniously, noneuponiousness

evanescent: (adj) vanishing
Many people believe that youth is evanescent, quickly vanishing before it can be truly appreciated.
Word Forms: evanescently, evanesce, evanescence Related Word: vanish

exacerbate: (vb) to increase the harshness or bitterness of
My headache was exacerbated by the child playing drums on the pots and pans.
Word Forms: exacerbatingly, exacerbation Related Word: acerbate
Note: exacerbate is often confused with exasperate (meaning to irritate).

exasperate: (vb) to intensely irritate
The airline passenger was exasperated by the last minute cancellation of his flight.
Word Forms: exasperatedly, exasperatingly, exasperation, exasperator
Related Word: asperate
Note: exasperate is often confused with exacerbate (meaning to increase).

exculpate: (vb) to clear from blame
The arson suspect was exculpated when forensics revealed that the fire had been the result of faulty wiring.
Word Forms: exculpable, exculpation, exculpatory Related Words: culpable, culprit
Antonym Forms: inculpate, inculpable, inculpation, inculpably, inculpatory, inculpability, inculpableness

exegesis: (n) an explanation or critical interpretation (especially of the Bible)
The minister is delivering an exegesis on the first two books of the Bible, where he will interpret the lessons from
Genesis and Exodus and apply them to modern times.
Word Forms: exegetic, exegetical, exegetically, exegete, exegetist

exigent: (adj) urgent; demanding
This is an exigent matter: if you don't reach the client in time, we stand to lose millions of dollars.
Word Forms: exigently, exigenceAntonym Forms: nonexigent, nonexigently, unexigent, unexigently

exonerate: (vb) to clear from blame
The use of DNA helped exonerate the innocent man; twenty years after he was sent to prison, he was released.
Word Forms: exoneration, exonerative, exonerator

exorbitant: (adj) greatly exceeding bounds of reason or moderation
I am forced to stop shopping at that grocery store until the owners lower the exorbitant prices on meats and produce.
Word Forms: exorbitantly, exorbitance

expatriate: (n) a person who lives outside his own country, often to renounce allegiance
The little village in Costa Rica is filled with American expatriates who moved there for a more relaxed lifestyle.
Word Forms: expatriate (vb.), expatriation Related Word: patriot

explicator: (n) a person who explains or interprets
My attorney was an excellent explicator; he clearly interpreted each clause of the legal contract.
Word Forms: explicate, explication, explicative, explicatively, explicatory Related Word: explicit

explicit: (adj) clearly expressed or demonstrated
Mr. Jones left explicit directions for the substitute so he was surprised when they were not followed.
Word Forms: explicitly, explicitness Antonym Forms: inexplicit, inexplicitly, implicit, implicitly, implicitness

exponent: (n) one who explains or interprets
The teacher was an exponent of turn of the century literature, explaining the themes that populated novels at that
time.
Word Forms: exponent (adj), exponential, exponentially  Antonym Forms: nonexponential, nonexponentially

expurgate: (vb) to revise by removing offensive text; to purify by cleansing
Recent versions of Huckleberry Finn have been expurgated to remove racial slurs and references.
Word Forms: expurgated, expurgation, expurgator Antonym Form: unexpurgated

extemporaneous: (adj) done without advance preparation
I was not expecting to be called to the stage, so I gave an extemporaneous speech.
Word Forms: extemporary, extemporaneity, extemporaneously, extemporarily, extemporaneousness, extemporariness

extol: (vb) to praise highly
The critic extolled the works of Shakespeare, citing them as the most important contribution to the English language.
Word Forms: extollingly, extolment, extoller

extraneous: (adj) not relevant or essential
When studying for the SAT, be sure to ignore the extraneous information in the book, such as the history of the test.
Word Forms: extraneously, extraneousness Related Word: extra

exuberant: (adj) overflowing, especially with joy
The young wife was exuberant when her husband returned safely from the military after a year-long tour of duty.
Word Forms: exuberantly, exuberance, exuberate

facetious: (adj) not intended to be taken seriously
Fatima, who hated getting her teeth cleaned, was being facetious when she said, “I love going to the dentist!”
Word Forms: facetiously, facetiousness

fallacy: (n) a false idea
Many textbooks teach the fallacy that George Washington cut down a cherry tree; it is widely believed that an author
made up that story to increase the sales of his book.
Word Forms: fallacious, fallaciously, fallaciousness

fallible: (adj) capable of making a mistake
Fallon knew that her boyfriend was fallible, but she was still disappointed to learn that he had lied to her.
Word Forms: fallibly, fallibility, fallibleness Antonym Forms: infallible, infallibly, infallibility, infallibleness
Related Word: fall

fallow: (adj) not in use
The fallow field had not been used for crops in over a decade so the farmer had to till and aerate the soil.
Word Forms: fallowness Antonym Form: unfallowed

fastidious: (adj) giving careful attention to detail; hard to please
Mrs. Foster, my teacher, is a fastidious grader; she deducts points for any error in grammar, punctuation, or spelling.
Word Forms: fastidiously, fastidiousness Antonym Form: unfastidious

fatuous: (adj) foolish and silly
The professor made a fatuous argument that everyone dismissed due to its extreme foolishness.
Word Forms: fatuously, fatuousness

fawn: (vb) to seek attention through flattery
The associate fawned over his supervisor in an attempt to receive a raise.
Word Forms: fawner, fawningly, fawningness

fecund: (adj) productive; fruitful
The fecund field has been producing record-setting crops for many years.
Word Forms: fecundity, fecundate, fecundator, fecundatory

felicity: (n) pleasing and appropriate style; happiness
The book review highlighted both the felicities and the imperfections of the novel.
Word Forms: felicitous, felicitously, felicitousness Antonym Forms: infelicity, infelicitous, infelicitously

fervid: (adj) hot or passionate
The fervid senator fought passionately for victim's rights.
Word Forms: fervidity, fervidly, fervidness Antonym Form: nonfervid, nonfervidly, nonfervidness Related Word:
fervent

fetid: (adj) stinky; smelling of decay
I hated turning the compost pile because of its fetid smell.
Word Forms: fetidly, fetidness, fetidity

flippant: (adj) disrespectful; lacking seriousness
Floyd was grounded for making flippant remarks about the new rules his father set for him.
Word Forms: flippantly, flippantness, flippancy

flotsam: (n) floating wreckage or useless, discarded items
In the filthy city, the gullies are filled with flotsam that finds its way into the sewer after a heavy rain.
Related Word: jetsam Note: Flotsam originally referred to the floating wreckage of a boat, while jetsam
referred to the items discarded by a ship in distress. Both are loosely used today to refer to useless, discarded items.

foible: (n) a minor flaw or weakness of character
Foster’s only foible is his inability to make a decision.
Related Word: feeble

fomentation: (n) a push for trouble or rebellion
The juniors would not have participated in skip day if it weren’t for the fomentation of their senior friends.
Word Forms: foment, fomenter

foppish: (adj) affecting extreme elegance in dress and manner
The foppish fellow wore a three piece suit and a top hat to the wedding.
Word Forms: foppishly, foppishness, foppery, fop

ford: (n) a shallow portion of a river used for crossing
Pioneers often would travel miles out of their way in order to find a ford that would allow them to safely cross a
river.
Word Forms: ford (vb), fordable

formidable: (adj) causing fear due to powerful strength
Forrest is a formidable opponent on the tennis court; he has not lost a set in his last twenty games.
Word Forms: formidably, formidableness, formidabilty

fortuitous: (adj) fortunate; by chance
Getting stuck in an elevator with a head hunter on my way to a job interview turned out to be a fortuitous event.
Word Forms: fortuitously, fortuitousness, fortuity  Antonym Form: nonfortuitous, nonfortuitously,
nonfortuitousness Related Word: fortunate

foster: (vb) to encourage or care for
The arts foundation hopes to foster art education in the schools by donating supplies and materials.
Word Forms: fostered (adj.), fosteringly, fosterer

fractious: (adj) unruly; irritable
Fido was a fractious dog who refused to cooperate even after months of obedience classes.
Word Forms: fractiously, fractiousness Antonym Form: unfractious, unfractiously, unfractiousness

frenetic: (adj) frantic
The castaways were frenetic in waving down the rescue plane.
Word Forms: frenetically, frenetical Antonym Form: nonfrenetic, nonfrenetically

frivolous: (adj) not serious; silly
The author’s new novel is a frivolous look at life in the city; although it lacks the serious tones of his previous novels,
it’s a fun and enjoyable story.
Word Forms: frivolously, frivolousness, frivolity, frivol, frivoler

frugal: (adj) characterized by the avoidance of excessive spending
A frugal shopper will always wait for items to go on sale or clearance before purchasing them.
Word Forms: frugally, frugalness, frugality

fulminate: (vb) to explode loudly or to loudly pronounce
Phil was angry at his boss and fulminated his frustrations to his coworkers at lunch.
Word Forms: fulminator, fulminatory, fulmination Antonym Form: nonfulminating, unfulminated,
unfulminating

furtive: (adj) sneaky
Frank devised a furtive plan in which he would sneak onto the rival’s campus and steal their school flag.
Word Forms: furtively, furtiveness

gambol: (n) to skip and frolic
Grandma was a fun friend; she gamboled through the field with me, collecting flowers and chasing butterflies.

garner: (vb) to earn or to collect
Garrett garnered a reputation as a fierce lawyer after winning the trial amid national scrutiny.
Antonym Form: ungarnered

garrulous: (adj) excessively talkative or wordy
The garrulous hairdresser talked the entire time he cut my hair.
Word Forms: garrulously, garrulousness, garrulity

genial: (adj) polite and friendly
It’s important for a kindergarten teacher to be genial; young children respond positively to a friendly adult.
Word Forms: genially, genialness, geniality Related Word: congenial

germane: (adj) related to; relevant
I have some ideas germane to the discussion that might resolve some of the issues we are having.
Word Forms: germanely, germanenessAntonym Forms: nongermane, ungermane

glib: (adj) fluent and talkative, often insincerely so
The glib salesman promised me that the car had been inspected, but the transmission blew two days after I bought it.
Word Forms: glibly, glibness Antonym Forms: unglib, unglibly

glower: (vb) to stare with dislike or anger
Mr. Glover glowered at me after I walked on his flowers.
Word Form: gloweringlyAntonym Forms: unglowering, ungloweringly

gradation: (n) gradual or successive changes
The bumble bee can see subtle gradations in color that humans are unable to notice.
Word Forms: gradational, gradationally Related Word: regradation

gratuitous: (adj) free; given without reason
On Monday, our supervisor announced that all employees were receiving two gratuitous tickets to this weekend’s
concert.
Word Forms: gratuitously, gratuitousness, gratuity

gregarious: (adj) sociable
Greg is a gregarious student who finds it difficult to avoid socializing during class.
Word Forms: gregariously, gregariousness Antonym Form: ungregarious

grievous: (adj) causing grief or very serious
During the war, families feared news from a grievous telegram indicating that their loved one had been injured or
killed.
Word Forms: grievously, grievousnessAntonym Forms: nongrievous, nongrievously, nongrievousness

grovel: (vb) lowering oneself as in asking forgiveness or showing respect
Grover groveled for forgiveness from his mother after he broke her favorite vase.
Word Forms: groveler, grovelingly Antonym Form: ungroveling

guile: (n) a skillful deception
The sneaky woman used guile to get close to the withdrawn millionaire; she pretended to have known his brother
who died in the war.
Word Forms: guileful, guilefully, guilefulness Antonym Forms: guileless, guilelessly, guilelessness
Related Words: guise, disguise

gustatory: (adj) relating to the sense of taste
The restaurant provides a gustatory experience by offering skewers of beef, pork, and poultry marinated in exotic
oils.
Word Forms: gustatorily, gustation, gustative, gustativeness

hackneyed: (adj) repeated too often; overfamiliar through overuse
Instead of relying on hackneyed clichés in your essay, try to create original metaphors and similes.
Word Form: hackney (vb.)

halcyon: (adj) joyful, peaceful, or prosperous
During the company’s halcyon days, the employees were making higher than average wages and enjoying benefits
unmatched by other corporations.
Word Forms: halcyonian, halcyonic

hapless: (adj) unlucky
The hapless fellow was in a car accident on the same day he lost the winning lottery ticket.
Word Forms: haplessly, haplessness

harangue: (n) a long, pompous speech
At the assembly, the principal delivered a harangue on the merits of perfect attendance and good behavior.
Word Forms: harangue (vb.), harangueful, haranguer

hedonist: (n) a person dedicated to the pursuit of pleasure
After working for years as a hospice nurse, Heidi had no respect for the hedonist who lived next door; by only
seeking pleasure, he left the more unpleasant activities to caretakers like Heidi.
Word Forms: hedonist (adj.), hedonistic, hedonistically, hedonism, hedonic, hedonically

hegemony: (n) leadership
The country exerted its hegemony over the smaller territories.
Word Forms: hegemonic, hegemonicalAntonym Form: antihegemony

heretical: (adj) characteristic of an opinion at odds with accepted beliefs
Many people in the church believe the heretical teaching of evolution should be banned.
Word Forms: heresy, heretic, heretically, hereticalness Antonym Forms: nonheretical, nonheretically

hermetic: (adj) isolated and protected
Many of the sea islands were hermetic during the Civil War, making them a safe place for runaway slaves to hide.
Word Forms: hermetical, hermetically Antonym Form: unhermetic Related Word: hermit

histrionic: (adj) overly dramatic
The histrionic patient pretended to faint when he saw the needle used for the vaccination.
Word Forms: histrionic (n.), histrionics, histrionical, histrionically

hoary: (adj) old or stale
Harry tells the same hoary stories at every dinner party.
Word Forms: hoarily, hoariness Antonym Form: unhoary

hubris: (n) pride; arrogance
If pride goes before a fall, hubris goes before a downfall.
Word Form: hubristic  Antonym Forms: nonhubristic, unhubristic

husband: (vb) to manage wisely or thriftily
Henry husbanded his finances so that he would have plenty to live on in retirement.
Word Form: husbander  Antonym Form: unhusbanded Related Word: husband (n)

iconoclast: (n) a person who who attacks cherished ideas or traditional institutions
Many religious leaders accused the author of being an iconoclast for presenting evidence that contrasted with the
religion’s long-standing beliefs.
Word Forms: iconoclastic, iconoclastically, iconoclasm

idiosyncrasy: (n) a characteristic that is peculiar to a specific person
Some people found Ida’s idiosyncrasy a source of humor, but I never made fun of her for wearing her shirt
backwards.
Word Forms: idiosyncratic, idiosyncratically

idolatrous: (adj) great adoration
The young girl's idolatrous worship of the teen heartthrob began to worry her mother.
Word Forms: idolatry, idolatrously, idolatrousness
Antonym Forms: nonidolatrous, nonidolatrously, nonidolatrousness Related Words: idol, idolize

ignoble: (adj) dishonorable; common
Your ignoble behavior at the dinner party will keep you off of invitation lists in the future.
Word Forms: ignobility, ignobleness, ignoblyAntonym Forms: noble, nobility, nobly

ignominious: (adj) disgraceful and shameful
Izzy’s ignominious crime brought shame and embarrassment to her entire family.
Word Forms: ignominiously, ignominiousness, ignominy

illusory: (adj) creating illusions; deceiving
The illusory sweepstakes isn’t really a contest at all; “winners” think they have won a free cruise, but the trip
actually costs several hundred dollars and requires attendance at marketing seminars.
Word Forms: illusorily, illusoriness, illusive Related Word: illusion

imbue: (vb) to inspire
After the seminar, our supervisor was imbued with the teachings of the keynote speaker, a management expert.
Word Form: imbuement  Antonym Form: unimbue

immutable: (adj) unchangeable
We are born with some immutable characteristics, such as race, gender, height, and eye color.
Word Forms: immutability, immutableness, immutably Antonym Form: mutableRelated Word: mutation

impasse: (n) blocked progress; deadlock
We came to an impasse in our discussion about our wedding colors; we both refused to compromise.

impecunious: (adj) poor
In less than a year, Imogen had lost all of her money, going from a wealthy businesswoman to a impecunious beggar.
Word Forms: impecuniously, impecuniousness, impecuniosity

imperturbable: (adj) calm; incapable of agitation
Imelda had imperturbable composure, which is why she was selected to tackle the nerve-wracking feat.
Word Forms: imperturbability, imperturbableness, imperturbably  Antonym Forms: perturb, perturbable

impervious: (adj) not capable of being affected
Ima was impervious to Jack’s insults; nothing he said seemed to affect her.
Word Forms: imperviously, imperviousness, imperviable Antonym Forms: pervious, perviously, perviousness

impetuous: (adj) impulsive
While at the airshow to see old war planes, Ivan made an impetuous decision to go skydiving.
Word Forms: impetuously, impetuousness, impetuosity Related Word: impetus

impious: (adj) lacking respect or devotion, usually for a god or religion
Imogene had a difficult time convincing her impious husband to attend church with the family.
Word Forms: impiously, impiousness Antonym Forms: pious, piously, piousness

implacable: (adj) incapable of being pacified or appeased
Inez was so upset at the waiter that she became implacable; nothing the manager offered was going to make her
happy.
Word Forms: implacability, implacableness, implacablyAntonym Forms: placable, placably, placability
Related Word: placid

implicit: (adj) implied though not directly expressed
Although we never mentioned the fight, there seemed to be an implicit agreement not to talk about it.
Word Forms: implicitly, implicitness, implicity Antonym Forms: explicit, explicitly, explicitness

imprecation: (n) a curse
The old woman dabbled in voodoo, and was known for casting imprecations on her enemies.
Word Forms: imprecate, imprecator, imprecatory  Antonym Form: unimprecated

impugn: (vb) to attack as false or wrong
The candidate impugned his opponent’s voting record, proving that she had voted against reform she now supports.
Word Forms: impugnable, impugnability, impugnment, impugner Related Word: oppugn

impute: (vb) to attribute or credit to
The doctors imputed her sudden weight loss to a problem with her thyroid gland.
Word Forms: imputable, imputably, imputative, imputatively, imputativeness, imputedly, imputer Related Word:
putative

incarnadine: (adj) red or pink; flesh-colored
For Valentine's Day, I gave my girlfriend incarnadine carnations since red is the color of love and passion.
Word Form: incarnadine (vb)  Related Word: carnation

inchoate: (adj) in the early stages of development
Your inchoate plan for the fund-raiser has a lot of potential, but we need to discuss some details before moving
forward.
Word Forms: inchoately, inchoateness, inchoation, inchoative, inchoatively

incipient: (adj) beginning; just starting
The zinc lozenges will help an incipient cold, but do nothing for a well-established virus.
Word Forms: incipiently, incipience, incipiency

incontrovertible: (adj) unquestionable; impossible to deny
Protesters demanded the release of the imprisoned woman, saying there was incontrovertible proof of her innocence.
Word Forms: incontrovertibly, incontrovertibility, incontrovertibleness
Antonym Forms: controvertible, controvertibly, controvertibility, controvertibleness, controvert

incorrigible: (adj) incapable of being corrected or punished
The incorrigible child continued to throw his vegetables even after the mother threatened to send him to his room.
Word Forms: incorrigibly, incorrigibleness, incorrigibility
Antonym Forms: corrigible, corrigibly, corrigibleness, corrigibility

incredulous: (adj) skeptical; not willing to believe
The incredulous car buyer did not believe the dealer’s claim that the car was accident-free; he insisted on seeing a
report on the car’s history.
Word Forms: incredulously, incredulousness, incredulity Related Word: incredible
Antonym Forms: credulous, credulously, credulousness, credulity

inculcate: (vb) to teach through persistent repetition
Ms. Ingles inculcated her students with a love of reading; many years later, an overwhelming majority reported that
they were still voracious readers.
Word Forms: inculcation, inculcative, inculcator

indigenous: (adj) native to
Although the flower can now be found all over the eastern United States, it is indigenous to Florida.
Word Forms: indigenously, indigenousness, indigenity, indigen, indigene

indignant: (adj) displaying anger due to unfairness
The seniors were indignant over their disqualification in the homecoming contest, claiming that the decision was
unfair.
Word Forms: indignantly, indignation

indolent: (adj) lazy
India was an indolent worker, and was thus fired when it was discovered that she was lazy.
Word Forms: indolently, indolence

ineffable: (adj) incapable of being put into words
Effie’s joy at being reunited with her long-lost brother was ineffable; words could not explain her happiness.
Word Forms: ineffably, ineffableness, ineffability Antonym Form: effable

inexorable: (adj) unyielding
Mary Ingalls was aware that she would lose her sight before she began her inexorable decline into blindness.
Word Forms: inexorability, inexorably, inexorableness  Antonym Form: exorable

ingenious: (adj) clever and inventive
Jeannie invented an ingenious device for the beach that combined a cooler, radio, and portable fan.
Word Forms: ingeniously, ingeniousness, ingenuity Related Word: genius

ingenue: (n) an artless, innocent young girl (especially as portrayed on the stage)
The young actress will play the part of the ingenue, an innocent girl who becomes caught up in the plot in Act II.
Related Word: ingenuous

ingrate: (n) an ungrateful person
Inga came off as an ingrate when she failed to thank her hosts for dinner.
Word Form: ingrately  Related Word: grateful

ingratiate: (vb) to put oneself in another's good graces
Ingrid's boyfriend ingratiated himself with her father by sharing a love of classic movies and old cars.
Word Forms: ingratiation, ingratiatory, ingratiating

inherent: (adj) existing as a natural and essential characteristic
The abused dog had an inherent distrust of men, so only female volunteers at the shelter could get close to him.
Word Forms: inherently, inhere, inherence Related Word: inherit

inimical: (adj) harmful or hostile
Oscar cast an inimical sneer at Melissa when she took credit for his idea.
Word Forms: inimically, inimicalness, inimicality, inimicable Related Word: enemy

iniquity: (n) wickedness
The wicked witch's iniquity kept Dorothy from returning to Kansas.
Word Forms: iniquitous, iniquitously, iniquitousness

innocuous: (adj) harmless
No one had to be evacuated after the tanker spill, as the gas released was innocuous.
Word Forms: innocuously, innocuousness, innocuity Antonym Forms: nocuous, nocuously, nocuousness
Related Word: inoculate

insidious: (adj) intended to entrap, deceive, or harm
Sid devised an insidious plan to get the witness to admit he hadn’t really witnessed the crime.
Word Forms: insidiously, insidiousness

insipid: (adj) bland, dull, or uninteresting
When I left for college, the insipid cafeteria food made me miss my father’s home-cooked meals.
Word Forms: insipidly, insipidness, insipidity Antonym Forms: sipid, sipidity

insolence: (n) rudeness
The headmaster said that insolence would not be tolerated; rude behavior towards a teacher would result in
suspension.
Word Forms: insolent (n.), insolently, insolence

insular: (adj) narrow-minded; isolated
The culture is criticized for its insular ideas, such as the belief that women should not be allowed to attend school.
Word Forms: insularly, insularism, insularity

insurrection: (n) a rebellion or uprising
King George ordered British troops to quash the colonist's insurrection, but the uprising led to the Revolutionary
War.
Word Forms: insurrectional, insurrectionally, insurrectionism, insurrectionist

inter: (vb) to bury
James Garfield, the 20th President of the United States who was assassinated in 1881, was interred in Cleveland,
Ohio.
Word Form: reinterAntonym Form: uninterred

interlocutor: (n) a person who takes part in a conversation
At the apartment complex, the two interlocutors continued to debate the merits of television outside my bedroom
window until well after midnight.
Word Forms: interlocution, interlocutory, interlocutorily Related Words: locution, eloquent

interregnum: (n) a period of time free from authority
When the king died, there was a two week interregnum as the prince returned from abroad for his coronation.
Word Form: interregnal

intractable: (adj) stubborn; difficult to manage
The intractable child refused to let the babysitter into the room.
Word Forms: intractability, intractableness, intractably

intransigent: (adj) refusing to yield or compromise
When it came to Edgar’s hunting trophies, Enid was intransigent; she refused to hang the deer heads on the wall.
Word Forms: intransigent (n.), intransigently, intransigence, intransigency

inundate: (vb) to flood
After the newspaper ran the controversial story, the editor was inundated with calls from hundreds of angry
subscribers.
Word Forms: inundation, inundatory, inundator

inure: (vb) to become used to
People in Alaska were inured to cold weather.
Word Forms: inuredness, inurement Antonym Form: uninured

invective: (n) violent criticism
The governor was quick to issue an invective denouncing the show that portrayed her state's residents as vulgar and
obscene.
Word Forms: invective (adj), invectively, invectiveness Antonym Form: uninvective

inveigle: (vb) to persuade with smooth talk
Vicki inveigled Vivianne into playing checkers, even though Vivianne would have rather played chess.
Word Forms: inveiglement, inveigler  Antonym Form: uninveigled

investiture: (n) ceremony for bestowing an official title
At the investiture, the detective was promoted to sergeant.
Word Form: investitive

invidious: (adj) intended to hurt, offend, or discriminate
Ivan’s invidious remarks to his wife shocked their guests; they had no idea that he could be so cruel.
Word Forms: invidiously, invidiousness

invoke: (vb) to summon into action or bring into existence
The psychic claimed that he could invoke the spirits in the house through an old-fashioned séance.
Word Forms: invocable, invocation, invocational, invoker Related Words: evoke, provoke, revoke

irascible: (adj) quickly aroused to anger
The irascible old lady caused a scene at the restaurant by yelling at the manager when her hamburger was
overcooked.
Word Forms: irascibly, irascibleness, irascibility Related Word: ire

itinerant: (adj) traveling from place to place to work
The itinerant pastor was transferred to our church from a ministry in Ohio; he will stay with us for six months before
going to New Hampshire.
Word Forms: itinerant (n.), itinerantly, itinerate, itineration Related Word: itinerary

jettison: (vb) to throw away
Jett was arrested when he jettisoned old boat fuel into the harbor.
Word Form: jettisonable

jingoism: (n) noisy and excessive patriotism for one's country
The candidate's jingoism cost him the election, as constituents did not believe he could tactfully handle foreign
policy.
Word Forms: jingo, jingoish, jingoist, jingoistic, jingoistically

jocular: (adj) characterized by joking
Jack's speeches were always entertaining because they were peppered with jocular anecdotes.
Word Forms: jocularly, overjocular, jocularity  Related Word: joke

juncture: (n) a critical point in time
At this juncture, I think it's important to merge the Human Resources and Marketing departments.

juxtapose: (vb) to place side by side
When Justin’s picture was juxtaposed with his father’s picture, the resemblance between the two was remarkable.
Word Form: juxtaposition Related Word: pose

keen: (adj) sharp as in a point, or sharp as in intelligence
It will take a keen mind to solve this difficult puzzle.
Word Forms: keenly, keenness

kindle: (vb) to light up or to excite
The novel "Jurassic Park" kindled his interest in dinosaurs.
Word Form: kindler Related Word: kindling

kinetic: (adj) characterized by motion
Some students are kinetic learners who learn best when they are moving around.
Word Form: kinetically  Antonym Form: nonkinetic Related Words: telekinesis, kinetics

knell: (n) sound of a bell at a funeral or a sign of looming death or destruction
The town was quiet, with boarded up buildings and no sign of life, a knell of the impending war.
Word Form: knell (vb)

lachrymose: (adj) tearful; sad
Lakeisa tends to get lachrymose over animal rescue commercials depicting cats and dogs in abusive situations.
Word Forms: lachrymosely, lachrymosity

laconic: (adj) expressing much in few words
A laconic essay will be scored higher than an essay with unnecessary words or sentences.
Word Forms: laconically, laconism Antonym Form: unlaconic

lament: (vb) to express grief; to mourn
When Lamont left for college, his little sister lamented his absence for weeks.
Word Forms: lament (n.), lamentingly, lamentable, lamentably, lamenter Antonym Form: unlamented

lampoon: (vb) to mock in a satire
The actors of "Saturday Night Live" make a living by lampooning current events.
Word Forms: lampoon (n), lampooner, lampoonist, lampoonery  Antonym Form: unlampooned

languid: (adj) lacking in energy or spirit
My boss's languid response to my proposal wasn't expected; I thought he'd be excited about my initiative and
creativity.
Word Forms: languidly, languidness  Antonym Forms: unlanguid, unlanguidly, unlanguidness
Related Word: languish

lapidary: (adj) relating to polished stones; characterized by exactness and extreme polishing
The author's lapidary manuscript was so carefully crafted that editors could find no mistakes.
Word Forms: lapidarian, lapidarist

largess: (n) generous gift-giving
Larissa's largess at the twins' birthday party would not soon be forgotten; she gave them enough toys to keep them
busy for a year.
Related Word: large

lassitude: (n) lack of energy; weariness
One symptom of the illness was lassitude; Leslie learned early on that she had no energy during an attack.

latent: (adj) existing but not visible or obvious
Latika clearly had latent ability in math, but she failed to put forward any effort in the subject so no one knew how
bright she really was.
Word Forms: latently, latency

laud: (vb) to praise, glorify, or honor
Landon was lauded for his achievements at the laboratory; he had made more progress in a year than most scientists
had made in a decade.
Word Forms: laudable, laudably, laudation, laudative, laudatory, laudator

lavish: (adj) very generous or extravagant
The lavish wedding reception had a steak and lobster dinner, several intricate ice sculptures, and a famous jazz
band.
Word Forms: lavishly, lavishness, lavishment, lavisher

legerdemain: (n) trickery; sleight of hand
The magician employed legerdemain to fool the audience into believing he pulled a rabbit from his hat.
Word Form: legerdemainist

levity: (n) inappropriate lack of seriousness
The teenagers' levity during the assembly on drinking and driving cost them six Saturdays in detention.

lexicography: (n) the act of writing dictionaries
Noah Webster’s career in lexicography developed from his dissatisfaction with British school books; he wrote his
first dictionary to help his elementary students learn to spell.
Word Forms: lexicographic, lexicographical, lexicographically, lexicographer Related Words: lexicon, dyslexic

liberate: (vb) free; unrestrained
When the farmer accidentally left the stall door open, the liberated horse sprinted for the woods.
Word Forms: liberated, liberative, liberatory, liberation, liberator  Antonym Form: unliberated

libertine: (adj) unrestrained by morals
Libby had no scruples and thus made libertine choices, never worrying about those affected or what others would
think.
Word Forms: libertine (n), libertinage, libertinism

licentious: (adj) unrestrained by morals
Libby had no scruples and thus made licentious choices, never worrying about those affected or what others would
think.
Word Forms: licentiously, licentiousness Antonym Form: nonlicentious, nonlicentiously, nonlicentiousness
Related Word: license

limpid: (adj) clear; calm
The limpid waters provided opportunity for the anglers to sight cast directly to the fish they could see in the clear
water.
Word Forms: limpidity, limpidness, limpidly

lissome: (adj) flexible
The lissome gymnast dazzled the audience with her tumbling routine.
Word Forms: lissomely, lissomeness

listless: (adj) lacking energy or spirit
My boss's listless response to my proposal wasn't expected; I thought he'd be excited about my initiative and
creativity.
Word Forms: listlessly, listlessness

loquacious: (adj) extremely talkative
Lance was disappointed in his loquacious date; she talked so much that she never had time to listen to any of his
stories.
Word Forms: loquaciously, loquaciousness, loquacity Related Words: eloquent, ventriloquist, soliloquy

lucid: (adj) clear; easy to understand
If your directions had been more lucid, I might have made it to the party on time.
Word Forms: lucidly, lucidness, lucidity Related Word: elucidate

lugubrious: (adj) excessively mournful; sad and gloomy
Lucy’s lugubrious behavior has started to annoy her friends; it has been two months since her breakup with Josh,
but she is still as gloomy as if it had happened yesterday.
Word Forms: lugubriously, lugubriousness, lugubriosity

luminous: (adj) radiating light; enlightening; easily understood
The meeting was luminous because we finally figured out the reason that the mayor was backing the construction
project.
Word Forms: luminously, luminousness  Antonym Forms: nonluminous, nonluminously, nonluminousness
Related Words: luminary, illuminate, luminescent

machination: (n) a crafty plot
The fairy tale follows the machinations of an evil stepsister who is out to steal the prince from the heroine.
Word Forms: machinate, machinator

maelstrom: (n) a powerful whirlpool or turbulent chaos
When the manager was fired, he left the office in a maelstrom; there was frequent infighting and little leadership.

magnanimous: (adj) noble and generous in spirit
The magnanimous donor has given over ten million dollars to children’s charities in the city.
Word Forms: magnanimously, magnanimousness, magnanimity

magnate: (n) an important person in a field of business
Henry Ford was an automotive magnate, manufacturing the first automobile that was affordable to the middle class.
Word Form: magnateship

malediction: (n) a curse
The members of the team feared that the old woman had placed a malediction upon their season because they hadn’t
won a game since accidentally shattering her windshield with a foul ball.
Word Forms: maledictive, maledictory, maledict Antonym Forms: benediction, benedictive, benedictory
Related Words: diction, dictate, dictionary

malevolent: (adj) evil
The malevolent old man plotted the demise of his neighbor’s barking dog.
Word Forms: malevolently, malevolence, malevolency

malice: (n) a desire to make others suffer
Malika’s sharp comment was delivered with malice; she knew that her words would hurt her mother’s feelings.
Word Forms: malicious, maliciously, maliciousness Antonym Form: unmalicious

malinger: (vb) to fake an illness to avoid responsibility
Malinda claims to have strep throat, but since she has been known to malinger in the past make sure she brings a
doctor's note when she returns to work.
Word Form: malingerer

malleable: (adj) capable of being shaped or influenced
Mallory worried that her malleable son would learn inappropriate behavior from the older boys he played with at
school.
Word Forms: malleably, malleableness, malleability Antonym Forms: unmalleable, unmalleability

malodorous: (adj) having an unpleasant smell
My malodorous shoe smelled so terrible that my mom threw it away.
Word Forms: malodorously, malodorousness Related Words: odor, odorously

mar: (vb) to make imperfect; to disfigure
My nearly-perfect report card was marred by a low grade in speech class.
Word Forms: mar (n.), marred (adj.) Antonym Form: unmarred

martial: (adj) relating to war
The mayor was in favor of taking a martial approach to the problem, preferring to send soldiers into the abandoned
houses to remove the squatters and drug dealers.
Word Forms: martialism, martialist, martially, martialness  Antonym Form: nonmartial

martinet: (n) a person who rigidly demands that rules are followed; a strict disciplinarian
Marty realized that the drill sergeant was a martinet, so his best course of action was to closely follow all the rules.
Word Forms: martinetish, martinetism

matriarch: (n) the female head of a family
As the matriarch of the family, Grandma sat at the head of the Thanksgiving dinner table.
Word Forms: matriarchal, matriarchic, matriarchalism, matriarchy
Antonym Forms: patriarch, patriarchal, patriarchic, patriarchalism, patriarchy Related Words: ma, maternal

maudlin: (adj) foolishly emotional
When Maude drinks too much, she becomes maudlin, crying over silly things like her shoelaces coming untied.
Word Forms: maudlinism, maudlinly, maudlinness Antonym Forms: unmaudlin, unmaudlinly

maverick: (n) a person who chooses to be independent in behavior or thought
Even though the other ranchers were branding their cattle, Sam was a maverick who believed he did not need to
follow the rules set by his associates.

melange: (n) a mixture
Melanie’s walls are decorated with a mélange of surfing posters and beach photographs.

mendacious: (adj) lying, false, or untrue
The mendacious girl said that she didn’t take her mother’s lipstick, but the bright red evidence was all over her face.
Word Forms: mendaciously, mendaciousness, mendacity

mendicant: (adj) begging
In the poverty-stricken country, mendicant children approach tourists to ask for food and money.
Word Forms: mendicancy, mendicity

mercurial: (adj) apt to change; volatile; lively
Meryl was known for her mercurial moods; she could be charming and kind one minute and caustic and hateful the
next.
Word Forms: mercurially, mercurialness Antonym Forms: unmercurial, unmercurially, unmercurialness
Related Word: mercury

meretricious: (adj) insincere; flashily attractive
Meredith bestowed meretricious praise upon Mark on-camera, but she had nothing nice to say about him off-camera.
Word Forms: meretriciously, meretriciousness Antonym Form: unmeretricious, unmeretriciously,
unmeretriciousness

meritocracy: (n) a form of social system in which power goes to those with superior abilities
Critics argue that a meritocracy cannot be fairly created, as intelligence and ability are difficult to measure
accurately.
Word Form: meritocratic Related Word: merit

meticulous: (adj) extremely careful and precise with details
Miss Walter demanded meticulous essays; perfect spelling and punctuation were essential for a high grade.
Word Forms: meticulously, meticulousness, meticulosity

militate: (vb) to have substantial influence
Millie's grandfather's significant donations to the university militated for her acceptance in the admissions process.
Word Form: militation Related Words: military, militia

mirth: (n) laughter or merriment
Even the old scrooge could not resist the mirth of the holiday season, as he eventually joined in the celebration.
Word Forms: mirthful, mirthfully, mirthfulness,  Antonym Forms: mirthless, mirthlessly, mirthlessness

misanthrope: (n) a person who hates and distrusts mankind
The main character is a bitter misanthrope who learns to trust again through her friendship with the children next
door.
Word Forms: misanthropist, misanthropic, misanthropical, misanthropically, misanthropy

miscreant: (n) a person who is evil or villainous
The miscreant came to town with the intention of creating strife and commotion, as he enjoyed watching others
argue.
Word Forms: miscreant (adj.), miscreance, miscreancy

miser: (n) a stingy person who lives in miserable conditions in order to save money
The old miser lives in a rat-infested apartment even though he has more than enough money to live in a nice home.
Word Forms: miserly, miserliness Related Words: misery, miserable

missive: (n) a letter
The governor sent out missives to her supportive constituents, thanking them for their contributions to her campaign.

mitigate: (vb) to make less intense or severe
Mitch was grounded for a week when he broke curfew, but his mom mitigated his punishment by several days when
she learned that he had been late because he was taking a sick friend to the hospital.
Word Forms: mitigable, mitigatedly, mitigation, mitigative, mitigatory, mitigator
Antonym Forms: immitigable, immitigably, immitigability, unmitigable, unmitigated, unmitigatedly

mollify: (vb) to soften or soothe
Molly was able to mollify the crying child by offering him an ice cream cone.
Word Forms: mollification, mollifier, mollifyingly, mollifiable

molt: (vb) to shed feathers
The cockatoo molted every spring in preparation for new feathers.
Word Form: molter

monastic: (adj) relating to monasteries or relating to a dedicated way of life
Mona lived a monastic life, refraining from sensual pleasures and the accumulation of material possessions.
Word Form: monastically  Antonym Forms: nonmonastic , nonmonastically
Related Words: pseudomonastic, monastery

morass: (n) 1. a swamp 2. a difficult situation
After Morgan accepted Jill’s invitation to the dance, he found himself in a morass; his friend offered him a ticket to a
concert that he really wanted to see, but it happened to be on the same night as the dance.

moratorium: (n) suspension of an ongoing activity
When many students were late returning from lunch, the principal placed a moratorium on off-campus lunch
privileges.
Word Form: moratory

mores: (n) important customs or beliefs of a group
The advertisements in the housekeeping magazine from 1950 reflect the social mores of the time.

morose: (adj) gloomy
After his girlfriend moved away, Morris became morose and depressed.
Word Forms: morosely, moroseness, morosity

multifarious: (adj) having many parts and much variety
The school offers multifarious activities after school; children should have no problem finding a program that
matches their interests.
Word Forms: multifariously, multifariousness

mundane: (adj) ordinary and somewhat boring
While a trip to the beach had once been exciting, we went so often that it had become mundane.
Word Forms: mundanely, mundaneness, mundanity

munificent: (adj) very generous
The munificent donor gave the hospital enough money to build a specialized center for heart patients.
Word Forms: munificently, munificentness, munificence

myopic: (adj) lacking long-term vision
Maya has a myopic outlook when it comes to investment; she complains about the money she is investing now, rather
than focusing on the money she will make in the future.
Word Forms: myopically, myopia

nadir: (n) the lowest point
Nadia entered the nadir of despair when she lost her job and her fiance called off the wedding.
Word Form: nadiral

naïve: (adj) inexperienced and gullible
Nan was naïve in thinking that no one looked at her online social page except her friends; her father looked at it
daily.
Word Forms: naïvely, naïveness, naïveté

narcissist: (n) a person who has excessive love or admiration of oneself
Nancy is a narcissist who is unable to love her husband or her children as much as she loves herself.
Word Forms: narcist, narcissism, narcistic, narcissistic, narcissistically

nascent: (adj) being born or beginning
The nascent hockey team did not have much experience, as this was their first year in the league.
Word Forms: nascence, nascency

nebulous: (adj) vague or cloudy
When I woke up in the hospital, I only had a nebulous memory of the accident.
Word Forms: nebulously, nebulousnessAntonym Forms: nonnebulous, nonnebulously, nonnebulousness

nefarious: (adj) extremely wicked
In the novel, the nefarious character plotted to financially destroy the hero.
Word Forms: nefariously, nefariousness

neologism: (n) a new word
Each year Merriam Webster decides which neologisms will be granted entry into their dictionaries.
Word Forms: neologist, neologistic, neologistical, neology

neophyte: (n) a beginner
Neil is a neophyte at downhill skiing, so he should stick to the smaller hills today.
Word Forms: neophytic, neophytish, neophytism

nettle: (vb) to irritateAntonym Form: unnettled
I was nettled by her annoying voice.
Word Forms: nettle (n), nettler, nettly

nihilism: (n) belief in the rejection of rules and the destruction of social and political order
During the rebellion, the followers of nihilism were the first to break the laws in the city.
Word Forms: nihilistic, nihilistically, nihility, nihilist

noisome: (adj) offensive (especially odors)
My noisome shoe smelled so terrible that my mom threw it away.
Word Forms: noisomely, noisomeness

nominal: (adj) in name only; minimal
The president was a nominal leader; the real people making the important decisions were his advisors.
Word Form: prenominal  Antonym Forms: unnominal, unnominally

noxious: (adj) harmful
The danger of a carbon dioxide leak is that the noxious fumes are odorless.
Word Forms: noxiously, noxiousness

nuance: (n) a subtle difference
The nuances between the two fonts are often missed by the untrained graphic designer.
Word Form: nuanced

numismatic: (adj) pertaining to coins or medals
The archeologist found numismatic evidence of the ancient civilization, including three coins with depictions of
animals.
Word Forms: numismatics, numismatical, numismatically

obdurate: (adj) stubborn
The obdurate child refused to eat his vegetables and sat at the dinner table with the untouched broccoli until
bedtime.
Word Forms: obdurately, obdurateness, obduracy Related Word: indurate

obfuscate: (vb) to confuse or make unclear
If a solution to a math question requires units to be in inches, the test makers may obfuscate the question by using
feet.
Word Forms: obfuscation, obfuscatory

oblique: (adj) slanting; not straight; indirect or evasive
The politician made oblique comments about his opponent, hinting at corruption but not actually saying it was an
issue.
Word Forms: obliquely, obliqueness

obstreperous: (adj) noisily defiant or aggressive
The obstreperous students crowded the school board meeting to protest the new dress code.
Word Forms: obstreperously, obstreperousness, obstreperosity

obscure: (adj) not clearly understood or expressed
Most of the movie audience did not understand the obscure reference to the other movie.
Word Forms: obscure (vb.), obscurely, obscureness, obscuredly, obscurity

obsequious: (adj) overly flattering or obedient
The new employee was distrusted by his co-workers because of his obsequious behavior; he agreed with everything
the boss said and laughed at all of her bad jokes.
Word Forms: obsequiously, obsequiousness, obsequence

obstinate: (adj) extremely stubborn
Mr. O’Brien was obstinate about eating at the bistro; he refused to eat anywhere else.
Word Form: obstinately, obstinateness, obstinacy

obstreperous: (adj) noisily defiant or aggressive
The obstreperous students crowded the school board meeting to protest the new dress code.
Word Forms: obstreperously, obstreperousness, obstreperosity

obstructionist: (n) a person who purposely blocks progress
Alberta worried that obstructionists would interfere with her environmental bill, ending her efforts to save the
eagles.
Word Forms: obstructionistic, obstructionism Related Words: obstruct, obstruction, obstructive

obtuse: (adj) intellectually slow; dull
You might have to simplify your explanation of photosynthesis because Obie is a bit obtuse.
Word Forms: obtusely, obtuseness

obviate: (vb) to prevent any perceived difficulty
The car seat manufacturer obviated the risk of injury by removing the cup holder from the most recent model.
Word Forms: obviable, obviation, obviator, preobviate  Antonym Form: unobviable

occlude: (vb) to shut or block
Plaque buildup in the arteries can occlude the flow of blood resulting in heart disease.
Word Forms: occludent, occlusion, occlusal Antonym Forms: include, nonocclusion

odious: (adj) offensive; hateful
The majority of Americans view dog fighting as an odious crime.
Word Forms: odiously, odiousness Related Word: odium

officious: (adj) aggressively forward
My officious neighbor insisted on helping me after my accident, but I really just wanted to be left alone.
Word Forms: officiously, officiousness, overofficious

ominous: (adj) threatening or foreshadowing evil
The dark clouds in the distance were ominous and threatened to ruin the picnic.
Word Forms: ominously, ominousness Related Word: omen

onerous: (adj) oppressive; burdensome
Cinderella was saddled with onerous household duties while she lived with her wicked stepmother.
Word Forms: onerously, onerousness, onerosity  Antonym Forms: nononerous, nononerously, nononerousness

opaque: (adj) not clear; not allowing light to pass through
The glass on the bathroom shower has an opaque layer that prevents people from seeing through it.
Word Forms: opaquely, opaqueness Related Word: opacity

opine: (vb) to express an opinion
The editor opined about the evils of genetically modified foods in today's opinion section of the newspaper.
Antonym Form: unopined Related Word: opinion

opprobrium: (n) disgrace or severe criticism due to shameful behavior
The team owner faced public opprobrium when he was caught making racial remarks.
Word Forms: opprobrious, opprobriously, opprobriousnessAntonym Form: nonopprobrious

opulent: (adj) rich and luxurious
The opulent kitchen had marble countertops and solid gold fixtures.
Word Forms: opulently, opulence, opulency

oration: (n) a formal speech
The political candidate delivered an oration about the benefits of her universal health care plan.
Word Forms: orate, oratorical, orator

ornate: (adj) highly decorated
The ornate palace had colorful paintings and intricate wood carvings in every room.
Word Forms: ornately, ornateness Related Word: ornament

orotund: (adj) a rich voice or pompous speech
The millionaire's orotund speech at the graduation ceremony was shocking; he was not normally known for being
pompous and pretentious.
Word Form: orotundity Related Word: rotund

orthodox: (adj) customary; traditional
Maria and Bryan chose an orthodox ceremony with the standard wedding vows and the typical progression of events.
Word Forms: orthodoxly, orthodoxness, orthodoxal, orthodoxical, orthodoxy
Antonym Forms: unorthodox, unorthodoxical, heterodox

ossify: (vb) to harden like bone; to become inflexible in habits or beliefs
Oscar was open-minded prior to college, but after graduation he began to ossify concerning politics.
Word Form: ossifier  Antonym Form: unossifying

ostensible: (adj) pretended
Austin’s ostensible excuse for missing school was that his grandmother was in the hospital; the real reason, however,
was that he went to the beach.
Word Forms: ostensibly, ostensive Related Word: ostentatious

overt: (adj) open and observable; not secret or hidden
The candidate’s overt support of stem cell research was unusual; he made it clear that if elected, he would work to
increase research efforts.
Word Forms: overtly, overtness Antonym Forms: covert, covertly, covertness

overwrought: (adj) extremely excited or disturbed
Eva became overwrought when she lost her cell phone.
Related Word: overwork

pacify: (vb) to calm; to bring peace
The babysitter used a teething ring to pacify the crying baby.
Word Forms: pacifiable, pacifyingly, pacific, pacifier, pacifist

paean: (n) a song of praise
The ancient Greeks sang paeans to Apollo and other gods.
Word Form: paeanism

palatial: (adj) like a palace; magnificent
Polly bought a palatial home that had eight bedrooms, two kitchens, a ballroom, and a six car garage.
Word Forms: palatially, palatialnessAntonym Form: unpalatial

palliate: (vb) to relieve or lessenAntonym Forms: nonpalliation, unpalliated
Aloe will palliate the pain from a sunburn.
Word Forms: palliation, palliator, palliative

pallid: (adj) pale; lacking energy
Palmer did not look healthy; his pallid skin had lost all trace of color.
Word Forms: pallidly, pallidness

panacea: (n) a cure for all diseases, or a solution to all problems
The manager believed the new software was a panacea for all of the company’s computer problems, but Pam was
skeptical of its ability to improve the entire system.
Word Form: panacean

panache: (n) dashing style, flair, or manner
Penny only dates men with panache; she prefers to be seen with flamboyant boyfriends.

panegyric: (n) a formal expression of praise
The director delivered a panegyric about the center’s most helpful volunteer, praising her for helping the needy.
Word Forms: panegyrical, panegyrically, panegyrist, panegyrize, self-panegyric

panoply: (n) complete or impressive array
Penelope has managed to attract a panoply of bird species to her backyard bird feeder.
Word Form: panoplied  Antonym Form: unpanoplied

paradox: (n) a statement that contradicts itself but nevertheless may still be true
Parker said, “I always lie,” but this is a paradox; if the statement is true, then he must be lying.
Word Forms: paradoxal, paradoxical, paradoxically, paradoxicalness, paradoxicality, paradoxology

paragon: (n) a perfect example
Parmida is a paragon of professionalism; she arrives on time, treats co-workers with respect, and refrains from
gossip.
Word Forms: paragon (vb.), paragoned

parenthetical: (adj) characterized by the use of parenthesis
A remark in parenthesis is called a parenthetical remark, which is usually used to explain the sentence.
Word Forms: parenthetic, parenthetically, parentheticalness Related Word: parentheses

pariah: (n) a person who is rejected; an outcast
Pamela became the pariah of the company when she was caught stealing money from her co-workers.
Word Forms: pariahdom, pariahism

parley: (vb) to talk or confer
The two generals met to parley their demands for surrender.
Word Forms: parley (n), parleyer

parody: (n) a humorous imitation
The awards show opened with a parody of a movie; all of the characters were played by monkeys dressed like the
actors.
Word Forms: parody (vb.), parodiable, parodic, parodist

parry: (vb) to ward off, avoid, or evade
The senator parried any questions about the scandal by focusing on the state of the economy.
Word Forms: parriable, parrierAntonym Forms: unparried, unparrying

parsimonious: (adj) extremely reluctant to spend money; frugal and stingy
The parsimonious woman told her grandchildren that the gumballs in the candy machine were too expensive.
Word Forms: parsimoniously, parsimoniousness, parsimony

partisan: (adj) tending to favor one group or one way of thinking
Gun control is a partisan issue; one party favors government management while the other prefers individual
authority.
Word Forms: partisanship, partisanry, partisan (n.) Antonym Forms: nonpartisan, bipartisan Related Word:
party

pastiche: (n) a work that is a mixture of styles, materials, or sources
Patsy's composition was truly a pastiche, borrowing musical elements from Bach, Beethoven, and Mozart.
Word Forms: pasticcio, pasticheur, pasticheuse

patriarch: (n) the male head of a family
As the oldest of the seven, Uncle Pat was the patriarch of the family and thus gave the toasts at all family gatherings.
Word Forms: patriarchal, patriarchic, patriarchalism, patriarchy
Antonym Forms: matriarch, matriarchal, matriarchic, matriarchalism, matriarchy Related Words: pa, paternal

paucity: (n) an insufficient quantity or number
Pam realized there was a paucity of hamburger buns.

peccadillo: (n) a minor fault or sin
Mr. Peck brought a bottle of white wine instead of a bottle of red wine to the dinner, but was forgiven for this
peccadillo when he also produced a box of luxurious European chocolates.

pedagogical: (adj) relating to education or teaching
The course for new teachers taught the pedagogical principal that all children could learn.
Word Forms: pedagogy, pedagogic, pedagogically, pedagogism, pedagogery, pedagogish, pedagog, pedagogue

pedantic: (adj) overly focused on small details while teaching or learning
It was difficult to be Penny’s partner because she was pedantic about recording every single step of the scientific
method.
Word Forms: pedantical, pedantically, pedanticalness, pedanticism, pedantism, pedantry, pedant, pedantesque

pejorative: (n) a word that is derogatory or belittling
At one time, 'imbecile' meant weak, but it has since become a pejorative to describe a person who is intellectually
slow.
Word Forms: pejorative (adj), pejoratively, pejoration
Antonym Forms: nonpejortaive, nonpejoratively, unpejorative, unpejoratively

penchant: (n) a strong liking
Penny has a penchant for poetry; she has filled two notebooks with poems and poetic lines.

penitent: (adj) feeling or expressing remorse for misdeeds
The penitent criminal asked for forgiveness from the family he had robbed.
Word Forms: penitently, penitence Antonym Forms: impenitent, impenitently, impenitence
Related Words: repentant, penance, penitentiary

penurious: (adj) extremely reluctant to spend money; stingy and frugal or extremely poor
The penurious old man refused to donate his spare change to the charity.
Word Forms: penuriously, penuriousness, penury

peregrinate: (vb) to travel
After high school, Perry chose to peregrinate through Europe before attending college.
Word Forms: peregrinator, peregrination  Related Words: peregrine, peregrinity

perfidious: (adj) tending to betray
The perfidious soldier was selling classified secrets to the army’s enemies.
Word Forms: perfidiously, perfidiousness, perfidy

perfunctory: (adj) done only as a matter of routine, with indifference and a lack of enthusiasm
The principal gave a perfunctory speech about attendance, even though the students had heard the same speech a
dozen times before.
Word Forms: perfunctorily, perfunctoriness

peripatetic: (adj) traveling about
Perry had a peripatetic nature, so after high school, he spent several years traveling Europe before attending college.
Word Forms: peripatetic (n), peripatetically, peripateticism

permeate: (vb) to spread throughout
The smell of sweet apples permeated the room when Grandma pulled the apple pie from the oven.
Word Forms: permeation, permeative, permeator, interpermeate Antonym Form: nonpermeation

pernicious: (adj) exceedingly harmful
The pernicious rumor could ruin several lives if permitted to spread.
Word Forms: perniciously, perniciousness

perquisite: (n) a payment or benefit in addition to one’s regular pay
While working at the marina, my perquisites included free boat storage, a discount at the tackle shop, and daily tips.

perspicacity: (n) intelligence manifested by being astute
My accountant’s perspicacity saved me thousands of dollars on my tax returns because he found hidden rebates.
Word Forms: perspicacious, perspicaciously, perspicaciousness Related Words: perspicuity, perspicuous

peruse: (vb) to read
After the lawyer perused the motion to suppress evidence, she declared it was a flimsy attempt that no judge would
grant.
Word Forms: perusable, peruser, preperuse, reperuse

pervasive: (adj) spreading or spread throughout
The pervasive odor of garlic quickly spread throughout the entire house.
Word Forms: pervasively, pervasiveness, pervade, pervadingly, pervadingness, pervasion, pervader
Related Words: invade, invasive

petulant: (adj) easily irritated over small issues
The petulant actress stormed off the set when she discovered that her dressing room did not have bottled water.
Word Forms: petulantly, petulance, petulancy Related Word: petty

phalanx: (n) a closely massed group
The soldiers formed a phalanx to protect the building from the protestors.

philanthropist: (n) a person who makes charitable donations intended to increase human well-being
As a young philanthropist, Phillip used to donate his allowance to the homeless shelter.
Word Forms: philanthropy, philanthropic, philanthropical, philanthropically

philistine: (n) a person who resists culture, the arts, or intellectual pursuits
Phil is such a philistine; he'd rather sit at home and watch reality shows than go see a play or visit a museum.
Word Forms: philistine (adj), philistinism

phlegmatic: (adj) unemotional; calm
I thought the kids would be excited about our trip to the amusement park, but their reaction was much more
phlegmatic.
Word Forms: phlegmatical, phlegmatically, phlegmaticalnessAntonym Forms: unphlegmatic, unphlegmatical

picayune: (adj) small and of little importance
The man is a fool to let a picayune argument destroy his friendship with his neighbor.
Word Forms: picayunish, picayunishly, picayunishness

pious: (adj) religiously devoted
The pious woman attended a church service seven days a week.
Word Forms: piously, piousness Antonym Form: impious

pith: (n) the essential part
The pith of the argument was that Ren wanted Grayden's toy.
Related Word: pithy

pithy: (adj) brief but meaningful
The pastor made a pithy remark about integrity that made me reflect on my own habits long after the short sermon.
Word Forms: pithily, pithiness Related Word: pith

placid: (adj) calm
When the wind died down, the lake became placid, with hardly a ripple disturbing the surface.
Word Forms: placidly, placidness, placidity

platitude: (n) remark repeated too often
"The customer is always right" is just a platitude in which very few service-industry workers believe anymore.
Word Forms: platitudinous, platitudinarian, platitudinize

plebeian: (adj) of the common people; lacking sophistication
The queen looked down upon her plebeian subjects who did not know anything about refinement or sophistication.
Word Forms: plebeianism, plebeianly, plebeiannessAntonym Form: unplebeian Related Word: plebe

plethora: (n) overabundance
At 300 applications, there are a plethora of qualified applicants for the program, but only 100 spots to fill.
Word Forms: plethoric, plethorically

pliant: (adj) capable of being bent or capable of being influenced
The pliant plastic can be easily molded into any shape, size, or design.
Word Forms: pliantly, pliantness, pliancy Related Word: pliable

plucky: (adj) brave
The plucky little duck jumped right into the water without waiting for its mother to lead the way.
Word Forms: pluckily, pluckiness

polemical: (adj) controversial; causing opposition
Polly published a polemical article about vaccinations that caused much debate among her readers.
Word Forms: polemic, polemically, polemicist, polemicize Antonym Forms: nonpolemic, nonpolemical,
nonpolemically

politic: (adj) ingenious, wise, or diplomatic
Paul made a politic manager; he kept employees happy and productive using tactful approaches and strategies.
Word Form: politicly  Related Word: political

polyglot: (adj) able to speak, read, or write in many languages
The polyglot woman was an asset to the company; she could speak with customers in Japan, Germany, Spain, and
Italy.
Word Forms: polyglot (n.), polyglotism Related Word: monoglot

populist: (n) a person who supports the rights and powers of the common people
The candidate is a populist who believes in promoting the causes of the working classes.
Word Forms: populist (adj.), populistic, populism

posit: (vb) to assume as fact; to put in place
The teacher posited that the children had cheated without hearing their side of the story.
Word Form: posit (n)  Related Word: deposit

potentate: (n) a powerful ruler
The potentate was born into the power of the monarchy; his family had ruled the country for over six hundred years.
Related Word: potent

pragmatic: (adj) practical; guided by practice rather than theory
When her bobby pin broke, Penelope found a pragmatic solution; she used a paper clip to hold back her stray hair.
Word Forms: pragmatical, pragmatically, pragmaticalness, pragmatism, pragmatistic, pragmatist

prattle: (vb) to babble
The child prattled on about his love of robots.
Word Forms: prattler, prattingly

precipitate: (vb) to bring about abruptly
Prescott’s sudden decision to move to a smaller apartment was precipitated by the loss of his job.
Word Forms: precipitate (adj.), precipitately, precipitateness, precipitative, precipitator Related Word:
precipitous

precis: (n) a short summary
Rather than submit the entire manuscript, I sent the publishing company a precis of my novel.
Word Form: precis (vb)

precocious: (adj) advanced in development or maturity (especially in mental aptitude)
The precocious little boy was able to solve the algebraic equation without any help from his teacher.
Word Forms: precociously, precociousness, precocity

predilection: (n) a preference
Preston has a predilection for cheddar so be sure not to serve mozzarella when he visits.

prescience: (n) knowledge of events before they happen
Grandma had an eerie prescience about my accident before it happened but I was too foolish to listen to her
warnings.
Word Forms: prescient, presciently

pretense: (n) a false act intending to deceive
He got an interview with the pretense that he had a doctorate from Yale, but the interviewer quickly discovered the
lie.
Word Forms: pretenseful, pretension, pretentious, pretentiously Antonym Forms: pretenseless, unpretentious
Related Word: pretend

prevaricate: (vb) to lie or deceive
Presley prevaricated about her grades, claiming to have a 3.5 GPA even though it was below 2.0.
Word Forms: prevarication, prevaricative, prevaricatory  Antonym Form: unprevaricating

pristine: (adj) pure, clean, or unused
The interior of the old car was in pristine condition; the upholstery was spotless and the equipment worked perfectly.
Word Form: pristinely

probity: (n) honesty and integrity
Prudence was often selected as hall monitor because of her probity; the teacher knew he could trust her.

proclivity: (n) a natural tendency
Prescott had a proclivity to lie, so few people trusted him.

prodigal: (adj) recklessly wasteful or lavishly abundant
The prince was criticized when his prodigal spending was documented by the tabloid.
Word Forms: prodigal (n), prodigally

prodigy: (n) a person, often a child, who is extraordinarily gifted or talented
The musical prodigy could play the most complicated Mozart composition on a piano by the time he was five years
old.
Related Word: prodigious

profligate: (adj) shamelessly immoral or recklessly wasteful
The profligate prince was criticized when his wasteful spending was documented by the tabloid.
Word Forms: profligate (n), profligately, profligateness

progenitor: (n) a direct ancestor or originator
Although dogs now come in all shapes, sizes, and temperaments, the progenitor of their species was the wild wolf.
Word Forms: progenitorial, progenitorship Related Word: genitor

proletarian: (adj) of the working class
Education is an important proletarian value; working class parents believe that a college degree will offer their
children many more career choices.
Word Forms: proletarian (n.), proletarianly, proletarianness, proletarianism, proletary, proletariat

proliferate: (vb) to grow rapidly
The franchise has proliferated; there were just two restaurants ten years ago, but now there are more than two
hundred.
Word Form: proliferative, proliferation

propensity: (n) a natural tendency
Mrs. Petty loved to talk to friends and neighbors, so it was no surprise that she had a propensity to gossip.

propitiate: (vb) to calm or pacify
The king was able to propitiate the mob by agreeing to meet with their leader.
Word Forms: propitiable, propitiatingly, propitiative, propitiator  Antonym Form: nonpropitiable

propriety: (n) accepted or appropriate standards
When traveling abroad, it is important to observe the proprieties of your host country.
Antonym Form: nonpropriety

prosaic: (adj) dull and lacking excitement
Pam claimed the movie was predictable and prosaic, causing her to fall asleep halfway through.
Word Forms: prosaical, prosaically, prosaicness, prosaicism

proselytize: (vb) to convert someone to another belief, religion, party, or cause
Prewitt spent the summer proselytizing for the governor’s re-election campaign.

provincial: (adj) unsophisticated and limited; associated with the country
The officer judged Prescott by his provincial dress; she assumed he was unsophisticated just because he wore
overalls.
Word Forms: provincially, provincialism, provincialize, provincialist Related Word: province

prudent: (adj) careful and sensible
Perry made a prudent decision when he chose not to ride home with his friend who had been drinking.
Word Forms: prudently, prudence, prudency, prudential
Antonym Forms: imprudent, imprudently, imprudence, imprudential Related Word: prude

puerile: (adj) childish; immature
Your puerile jokes are suitable for the playground, but they won't get many laughs in a comedy club.
Word Forms: puerilely, puerilismAntonym Forms: nonpuerile, nonpuerilely

pugilist: (n) a person who fights with his fists; a boxer
The two pugilists entered the ring for the first round of the boxing match.
Word Forms: pugilistic, pugilistically, pugilism

pugnacious: (adj) tending to quarrel or fight easily
Paul cannot walk his pugnacious dog in the park because she always starts fights with the other dogs.
Word Forms: pugnaciously, pugnaciousness, pugnacity Related Word: pugilistic

pulchritude: (n) beauty
The model's pulchritude earned her the coveted spot on the cover of the magazine.
Word Form: pulchritudinous

punctilious: (adj) marked by precise accordance with details
Mr. Putnam is punctilious about punctuation; all of his students must correctly use periods, commas, and
semicolons.
Word Forms: punctiliously, punctiliousness, punctilio Related Word: punctual

pundit: (n) a critic or expert
The political pundits are employed by newspapers and television networks to evaluate the actions of the President.
Word Forms: punditic, punditically, punditry, punditocracy

pungent: (adj) sharp; biting
Cosette's pungent remark stung Kent; he could handle criticism about his job, but her bitter words were personal.
Word Forms: pungency, pungently Antonym Forms: nonpungency, nonpungent, nonpungently

pusillanimous: (adj) timid; cowardly
The pusillanimous lion asked the wizard for courage in the old fairy tale.
Word Forms: pusillanimously, pusillanimity

putrefy: (vb) to decay
The forgotten vegetables putrefied in the hot sun.
Word Forms: putrefiable, putrefierAntonym Forms: unputrefiable, unputrefiedRelated Word: putrid

quaff: (vb) to drink a beverage
Quinn quaffed three sodas as if she had an unquenchable thirst.
Word Forms: quaffer, quaffable  Antonym Form: unquaffed

quell: (vb) to put an end to
The coach quelled the rumor that he was taking another job by signing an extension of his current contract.
Word Forms: quellable, queller

querulous: (adj) complaining
Quentin’s querulous tone irritated Nina; he always found something about which to complain.
Word Forms: querulously, querulousness

quiescent: (adj) being quiet or still or inactive
When the mine closed, the once-bustling town became quiescent and forlorn.
Word Forms: quiescently, quiescence, quiescency Related Word: quiet

quixotic: (adj) not sensible about practical matters; idealistic and unrealistic
I let Quincy make his quixotic plans for our summer vacation; he would soon realize that his itinerary was too
expensive and unrealistic.
Word Forms: quixotical, quixotically, quixotism, quixote Related Name: Don Quixote

quotidian: (adj) daily or commonplace
The teacher completed a quotidian report that tracked her student's absences.
Word Forms: quotidianly, quotidianness

raconteur: (n) a skilled storyteller
Raquel was a true raconteur; by the time she finished telling the story about her vacation, everyone in the room was
intently listening.
Word Form: raconteuse  Related Word: recount

raiment: (n) clothes
Raymond brought a change of raiment with him so that he could shower and dress after basketball practice.
Related Word: array

rancorous: (adj) showing deep-seated resentment
In the fairy tale, the rancorous stepmother is jealous of the young maiden’s beauty, youth, and innocence.
Word Forms: rancor, rancorously, rancorousness Related Word: rancid

raucous: (adj) unpleasantly loud and harsh
Rachel’s raucous laughter often drove people away.
Word Forms: raucously, raucousness, raucity

raze: (vb) to tear down
The old abandoned buildings were razed in preparation for the construction of the new baseball stadium.
Word Form: razer

rebuke: (vb) to sharply criticize or reprimand
The principal rebuked the three students who wandered away from their chaperone on the field trip.
Word Forms: rebuke (n.), rebukingly, rebukable, rebuker

rebut: (vb) to prove false using evidence
The lawyer rebutted the witness’s testimony by providing contrary evidence.
Word Forms: rebuttable, rebuttal, rebutter Related Word: but (conj.)

recalcitrant: (adj) stubbornly resistant to authority or control
The recalcitrant protesters were not fazed by the presence of the campus security officer, and only a handful of them
disbanded when the police arrived.
Word Forms: recalcitrant (n.), recalcitrance, recalcitrancy, recalcitrate, recalcitration

recondite: (adj) difficult to understand without special knowledge
The recondite blueprints were meant to be understood by architects, not by the layperson.
Word Forms: reconditely, reconditeness

redoubtable: (adj) worthy of fear and respect
Forrest is a redoubtable opponent on the tennis court; he has not lost a set in his last twenty games.
Word Forms: redoubtableness, redoubtably, redoubted

redress: (vb) to correct or to relieve
The newspaper redressed the issue by offering an apology and printing the correct name of the suspect.
Word Forms: redress (n), redressable, redresserAntonym Form: unredressable

refulgent: (adj) radiant; shining
The movie star's refulgent dress sparkled in the lights on the red carpet.
Word Forms: refulgence, refulgency, refulgentness, refulgently  Antonym Forms: unrefulgent, unrefulgently

refute: (vb) to prove to be false; to deny as true
The senator refuted claims he was arrested for careless driving by publishing his flawless driving record in the
paper.
Word Forms: refutable, refutably, refutability, refutation, refutal, refuter
Antonym Forms: irrefutable, irrefutably, irrefutability

rejoinder: (n) a response
Reggie's rejoinder did not sufficiently answer the question.
Antonym Form: nonrejoinder

relegate: (vb) to assign to a less important position; to demote
Rae Ann was relegated to dishwashing when she was caught being rude to the restaurant customers she was serving.
Word Forms: relegable, relegation Antonym Forms: unrelagable, unrelegated

remiss: (adj) careless and neglectful
Rebekkah was criticized for being remiss in her work; she had made many careless mistakes this week.
Word Forms: remissly, remissness

remuneration: (n) payment
Each of the workers received remuneration for helping Remy paint his house.
Word Forms: remunerate, remunerable, remunerability, remunerably, remunerative, remuneratively,
remunerativeness,
remuneratory, remunerator

renounce: (vb) to give up; to turn away from
The king renounced the thrown when he married a woman who was not accepted by the royal family.
Word Forms: renounceable, renouncement, renouncer Related Words: announce, denounce

repast: (n) a meal
We sat down to a repast of fried chicken, corn on the cob, and coleslaw.
Word Form: repast (vb)

replete: (adj) filled; complete
My professor returned my essay replete with comments, suggestions, and criticisms.
Word Forms: repletely, repleteness, repletive, repletivelyAntonym Form: unreplete

repose: (n) state of calmness; peace
The artist likes to paint his subjects in repose as they lounge on the couch.
Word Forms: repose (vb), reposedly, reposedness, reposer

reprehensible: (adj) deserving of punishment
It’s a harsh punishment, but I do not feel sorry for you; stealing from a charity is a reprehensible crime.
Word Forms: reprehensibly, reprehensibility, reprehensibleness, reprehension Related Word: reprehend

reproach: (vb) to blame; to express criticism towards
The board of directors reproached the company president for falling profits and decreased revenue.
Word Forms: reproach (n.), reproachingly, reproachable, reproachableness, reproachably
Antonym Forms: irreproachable,unreproachable, reproachlessRelated Word: reproachful

repudiate: (vb) to reject
The celebrity repudiated claims that she had undergone plastic surgery.
Word Forms: repudiable, repudiative, repudiation, repudiatory, repudiator

repugnant: (adj) offensive
The spoiled eggs that had sat in the hot car for several weeks offered the most repugnant smell I had ever
experienced.
Word Forms: repugnantly, repugnance, repugnancy

requite: (vb) to repay or retaliate
I made a casserole for Rebecca last week and she requited the favor by returning my casserole dish filled with
cookies.
Word Forms: requitable, requitement, requiter Antonym Forms: unrequitable, unrequited, unrequiting

rescind: (vb) to revoke or repeal
The prospective buyers rescinded their offer on the house when they learned it had a termite infestation.
Word Forms: rescindable, rescinder, rescindmentAntonym Form: unrescinded

restive: (adj) nervous; restless; impatient with authority
The restive suspect was frustrated with the booking process; he was anxious to call his lawyer and post bond.
Word Forms: restively, restiveness

reticent: (adj) inclined to keep quiet and private
Ironically, the actor once known for his outspoken behavior became reticent in later years, refusing to grant
interviews.
Word Forms: reticently, reticence, reticency

revere: (vb) to regard with respect and awe
Paul Revere was one of many colonists who revered freedom and democracy.
Word Forms: reverable, reverent, reverently, reverence, reverential, reverer
Antonym Forms: irreverent, irreverently, irreverence Related Word: reverend

reviler: (n) a person who uses abusive language
Reva’s husband was a reviler who constantly criticized her appearance and behavior.
Word Forms: revile, revilement, revilingly Related Word: vile

rhapsodize: (vb) to talk with great enthusiasm
The saleswoman rhapsodized about the benefits of her company’s product.
Word Forms: rhapsody, rhapsodic, rhapsodical, rhapsodically, rhapsodist

rhetoric: (n) skill in using language to persuade; empty talk
The real estate agent was well-versed in the rhetoric needed to sell the broken-down house.
Word Forms: rhetorical, rhetorically, rhetoricalness  Antonym Forms: nonrhetorical, unrhetorical

ribald: (adj) vulgar
The comedian's ribald humor was offensive to many of the audience members who walked out of the club.
Word Form: ribaldly

rococo: (adj) ornate style in language, music, etc.
Her first novel was too rococo for the editor, who recommended that she delete some of the flowery language.

sacrosanct: (adj) sacred; not to be criticized or violated
Mr. Sackett considered his baseball cards sacrosanct; they were displayed proudly in his office behind thick
plexiglass so no one would disturb them.
Word Forms: sacrosanctity, sacrosanctness

sagacious: (adj) acutely insightful and wise
The sagacious teacher was quickly able to pinpoint Sarah’s learning disability, and thus tailor lessons to better help
the child comprehend the material.
Word Forms: sagaciously, sagaciousness, sagacity Related Word: sage

sage: (n) a person who is very wise
Villagers who have seemingly unsolvable problems often seek the advice of the sage.
Word Forms: sage (adj.), sagely, sageness Related Word: sagacious

salient: (adj) easily observable; prominent
Sally's most salient trait was her nose; it was large and slender, but somehow fit with her other delicate features.
Word Forms: saliently, salience  Antonym Forms: unsalient, unsaliently

salubrious: (adh) healthy; wholesome
This salubrious tea is said to help cure many ailments.
Word Forms: salubriously, salubriousness, salubrity Antonym Forms: nonsalubrious, nonsalubriously,
nonsalubriousness

sanctimonious: (adj) being hypocritically religious or righteous
The principal gave me a sanctimonious lecture about my tardiness, even though he was late to our last two meetings.
Word Forms: sanctimoniously, sanctimoniousness, sanctimony, sanctimonial Related Words: sanctity, sanctify

sanguine: (adj) confidently optimistic and cheerful
Dr. Sanchez enjoyed working with Sandy, his most sanguine patient; she was always confident that her test results
would be good, and if they weren’t, she was optimistic about her treatment.
Word Forms: sanguinely, sanguineness, sanguinity

sardonic: (adj) characterized by bitter mocking
Sara's sardonic reply was meant to ridicule the boy.
Word Forms: sardonically, sardonicismAntonym Forms: unsardonic, unsardonically

satiate: (vb) to fill to satisfaction
After a day without anything to eat, the huge spaghetti dinner satiated my appetite.
Word Forms: satiated, satiationAntonym Forms: nonsatiation, unsatiated, unsatiatingRelated Word: sate

schism: (n) division of a group into opposing factions
The disagreement in the teacher’s lounge created two schisms in the school: teachers who approved of the rule
change, and those who opposed it.
Word Forms: schismatic, schismatically, schismaticalness, schismatize, schismatist Antonym Form: schismless

scintillating: (adj) brilliantly clever or flashy and exciting
The animated movie has been praised for its scintillating dialogue, which is intended more for adults than children.
Word Forms: scintillatingly, scintillate, scintillant, scintillantly, scintillation

scoff: (vb) to laugh at and show open disrespect
Scott scoffed at the skate park rules; after the park closed, he hopped the fence and continued to skate until dark.
Word Forms: scoff (n.), scoffingly, scoffer

scrupulous: (adj) abiding by morals or strict rules
The scrupulous executive would not let the advertisement run with the misleading information printed in it.
Word Forms: scrupulously, scrupulousness, scrupulosity
Antonym Forms: unscrupulous, unscrupulously, unscrupulousness, unscrupulosity Related Word: scruples

sedition: (n) instigation of rebellion
If the founding fathers had been caught, they would have faced charges of sedition for starting the American
Revolution.
Word Forms: seditionary, seditionist, seditious, seditiously, seditiousness Antonym Forms: antisedition,
nonseditious

sedulous: (adj) marked by care and persistent effort
Siera was impressed by Wayne’s sedulous pursuit of a date; every day for the last three weeks, he had sent her a
flower.
Word Forms: sedulously, sedulousness, sedulity

sentient: (adj) experiencing sense perception and consciousness
In the film, the robot becomes sentient, experiencing human emotions and senses.
Word Forms: sentiently, sentience, sentiency Antonym Forms: insentient, insentience, insentiency

seraphic: (adj) of an angel or celestial being
The toddler looks so seraphic when he sleeps at night that it's easy to forget what a devil he is by day.
Word Forms: seraph, seraphim, seraphical, seraphically, seraphicalnessAntonym Form: nonseraphic

sibilant: (adj) having a hissing sound
The patient’s respiration was weak and sibilant, the result of smoking for so many years.
Word Forms: sibilantly, sibilance, sibilancy

sinecure: (n) a paid job with little work
Cindy was fortunate to find a sinecure; she simply had to show up three days a week to collect a paycheck.
Word Forms: sinecureship, sinecurism, sinecurist

slake: (vb) to relieve thirst, hunger, desire, etc.; to make less intense
The ice cold soda slaked my thirst.
Word Forms: slakable, slakelessAntonym Forms: unslakable, unslaked

sobriquet: (n) a nickname
The baby's full name was long and burdensome, so his parents used the sobriquet "Peanut."
Word Form: sobriquetical

solecism: (n) an error, especially in grammar
The contraction "ain't" is a solecism that should be removed from your vocabulary.
Word Forms: solecist, solecistic, solecistical, solecistically

solicitous: (adj) anxious, eager, or worried
The solicitous applicant was forced to wait three months before he received a response from the college.
Word Forms: solicitously, solicitousness

solvent: (adj) able to meet financial obligations
Sully worked three jobs in order to remain solvent.
Word Forms: solventless, solvently

somnolent: (adj) sleepy or drowsy
The somnolent truck driver had been awake all night and was anxious to find a rest area so she could sleep.
Word Forms: somnolently, somnolence, somnolency, somnolescent
Antonym Forms: insomnolent, insomnolently, insomnolence, insomnolency Related Word: insomnia

sonorous: (adj) full and loud and deep, as a sound
The sound from the sonorous bell echoed throughout the cathedral.
Word Forms: sonorously, sonorousness, sonority Antonym Form: insonorous

sophistry: (n) a false argument meant to trick someone
The mayor used sophistry to trick most of the town residents into believing that the property tax increase was
necessary.
Word Forms: sophism, sophist, sophister

soporific: (adj) tending to make sleepy or drowsy Related Words: soporose, soporous
Sophie sang the soporific lullaby to help her young daughter fall asleep.
Word Forms: soporifically, soporiferous, soporiferously, soporiferousness

Spartan: (adj) strict; simple; serious
Spencer's Spartan apartment at Michigan State University was clean and neat, free of clutter or any luxuries.
Word Forms: Spartanism, Spartanly, SpartanicallyAntonym Form: non-Spartan

specious: (adj) 1. plausible but false 2. deceptively pleasing
The merits of the diet are specious; while we want to believe we can eat unlimited protein, there are many health
risks associated with the high-cholesterol plan.
Word Forms: speciously, speciousness, speciosity

sportive: (adj) playfulAntonym Forms: unsportive, unsportively, unsportiveness
The sportive kitten chased the ball of yarn.
Word Forms: sportively, sportiveness, sportability
Related Word: sport

spurious: (adj) false; not legitimate
The applicant made spurious claims about attending a prestigious private school, but when the college learned the
truth, they denied his application.
Word Forms: spuriously, spuriousness

squalid: (adj) filthy and repulsive
The abandoned home was squalid; it was infested with rats and filled with trash.
Word Forms: squalidly, squalidness, squalidity

stasis: (n) state of inaction or lack of progress
The company fluctuated between periods of growth and periods of stasis.
Word Form: stasesRelated Word: static

stentorian: (adj) very loud
The best cheerleaders have stentorian voices.
Word Form: stentorianlyAntonym Form: unstentorian

stevedore: (n) a laborer who loads and unloads vessels in a port
Before the ship left port, the stevedores loaded it with nearly four tons of food and supplies for the long voyage.
Word Form: stevedore (vb.)

stifle: (vb) to stop or hold back
I stifled a yawn so Grandpa wouldn’t know that I was bored by his story.
Word Forms: stiflingly, stifler

stigma: (n) a mark of disgrace
Steve was able to find a job despite the stigma of having served time in prison.

stoic: (adj) free from emotion; unmoved
Mr. Stone's face remained stoic despite the pain and anger he was experiencing.
Word Forms: stoic (n), stoical, stoically, stoicalness Antonym Form: unstoic

stolid: (adj) unemotional; unmoved
Mr. Stone's face remained stolid despite the pain and anger he was experiencing.
Word Form: stolidity, stolidness, stolidly

stricture: (n) a criticism
The film critic made several strictures about the movie’s poor dialogue.
Word Form: strictured

stultify: (vb) to make one appear foolish, stupid, or useless
The high school student stultified herself by insisting that Pittsburgh was in Tennessee.
Word Forms: stultifyingly, stultification, stultifier

stymie: (vb) to stump or hinder
The warden was stymied by the escape; the prisoners' cell doors were still locked, and there were no holes in the
walls.
Word Form: stymie (n.)

sublime: (adj) of high value; supreme Antonym Form: unsublimed
The sublime chef was well known for her amazing dishes.
Word Forms: sublimely, sublimeness, sublimer, sublimity

subterfuge: (n) something intended to deceive
Susan used the subterfuge of homework to avoid going to her grandmother’s house with the rest of her family.
Related Word: fugitive

subtle: (adj) difficult to detect
The subtle irony throughout the novel is missed by most readers.
Word Forms: subtly, subtleness, subtlety Antonym Forms: unsubtle, unsubtly

subversive: (adj) supporting the overthrowing of a government
The subversive group was arrested when one of the members told of the group’s plot to overthrow the king.
Word Forms: subversive (n.), subversively, subversiveness, subversivism, subvert, subversion

succinct: (adj) expressed in few words; concise
Your summary must be succinct, highlighting the main ideas but omitting the bulk of the text.
Word Forms: succinctly, succinctness  Antonym Forms: unsuccinct, unsuccinctly

sully: (vb) to make dirty or unpure
Mrs. Sullivan’s reputation was sullied by accusations that she was embezzling money from the PTA.
Word Form: sulliable Antonym Form: unsullied

supercilious: (adj) arrogantly disdainful
Sue, who always wore designer clothes, glanced at my generic shoes with a supercilious sneer.
Word Forms: superciliously, superciliousness

superfluous: (adj) having more than needed or wanted; excessive
The lawyer’s continuing arguments were superfluous, as the jury had already reached a verdict.
Word Forms: superfluously, superfluousness, superfluity

supplant: (vb) to replace or take the place of
In the early 1990s, compact discs supplanted long-playing records.
Word Forms: supplantation, supplanter

surfeit: (n) surplus; extra
There is a surfeit of gasoline this month so the price will be lowered significantly.
Word Form: surfeiter Antonym Forms: unsurfeited, unsurfeiting

surly: (adj) bad tempered or rude
The surly customer was unhappy with every aspect of his meal.
Word Forms: surlily, surliness  Antonym Forms: unsurlily, unsurliness, unsurly

surreptitious: (adj) stealthy and secret
Before the colonists declared independence, they held a series of surreptitious meetings to secretly discuss their plan.
Word Forms: surreptitiously, surreptitiousness

sybarite: (n) a person devoted to luxury
Sybil was a difficult dinner guest because she was a sybarite, insisting on the finest china, most luxurious decor, and
the most expensive food.
Word Forms: sybarite (adj), sybaritism

symbiosis: (n) a mutually beneficial relationship
Bees and flowers live in symbiosis; the bees pollinate the flowers while the flowers feed the bees.
Word Forms: symbiotic, symbiotical, symbiont

sycophant: (n) a person who flatters others in order to gain personal favor; a brown-noser
Sidney is a sycophant who compliments our English teacher in order to get a better grade on his assignments.
Word Forms: sycophantic, sycophantical, sycophantically, sycophantish, sycophantishly, sycophantism

syncopated: (adj) to cut short; to accent beats that are not usually accented
Because the readers longed for fluency and completion, the syncopated poem seemed unfinished.
Word Forms: syncopate, syncopation, syncopator  Antonym Form: unsyncopated

tacit: (adj) unspoken and implied
Although she never commented on our performance, the principal gave her tacit approval of our band by asking us
to play at the next school function.
Word Forms: tacitly, tacitness Related Word: taciturn

taciturn: (adj) silent; not willing to talk
The detective asked the lost girl her name, but the child remained taciturn, making it impossible to locate her
parents.
Word Forms: taciturnly, taciturnity  Antonym Forms: untaciturn, untaciturnly

tawdry: (adj) gaudy and cheap
The pretentious members of the club gawked at the guest's tawdry jewelry but she was impervious to their rude
stares.
Word Forms: tawdrily, tawdrinessAntonym Form: untawdry

temerity: (n) fearless daring
Tim jumped from the plane with temerity; he seemed so fearless and relaxed that it was difficult to tell that this was
his first skydiving experience.
Word Forms: temerarious, temerariously, temerariousness

temperate: (adj) moderate; not extreme
The plants prefer a temperate climate—not too hot and not too cold.
Word Forms: temperately, temperateness, temperance, temper (vb.)
Antonym Forms: intemperate, intemperately, intemperateness

tenacious: (adj) unyielding; stubborn
The tenacious defense refused to let the opponent score.
Word Forms: tenaciously, tenaciousness, tenacity

toady: (n) a person who flatters others in order to gain personal favor; a brown-noser
The professional athlete has several toadies who play to his ego in order to enjoy the perks of being in his entourage.
Word Forms: toady (vb.), toadyish, toadyism

tome: (n) a long, heavy book
The professor wants a short summary of your biography, not a tome he has to lug home with him.

torpid: (adj) sluggish; lacking energy
After the long weekend, Tony was torpid; even with multiple cups of coffee, he was sluggish all morning.
Word Forms: torpidity, torpidness, torpidly

transient: (adj) passing quickly or staying briefly
The most transient years of your life are those spent in high school; someday when you realize how quickly your time
there passed, you’ll wish you had spent more time enjoying your youth.
Word Forms: transient (n.), transiently, transientness, transience Antonym Form: intransient Related Word:
transitory

treacly: (adj) overly sweet or sentimental
The movie is treacly, with several emotional scenes; it should be viewed with a box of tissues instead of a box of
popcorn.
Word Form: treacle

trenchant: (adj) keen, cutting, or energetic
Trent's trenchant wit was a bit too caustic for some of the audience, while others found him to be an effective
speaker.
Word Forms: trenchancy, trenchantly

trite: (adj) repeated too often; overfamiliar through overuse
Be sure to avoid trite expressions in your essay; instead of writing clichés like “I learned my lesson the hard way,”
choose original sentences such as “It was a difficult lesson to learn.”
Word Forms: tritely, triteness

truculence: (n) brutal cruelty and aggressiveness
After the fight in school, Truman was expelled; the school board said that his truculence was a danger to the others.
Word Forms: truculent, truculently, truculency

truncated: (adj) shortened by cutting off a part
The author published a truncated version of the novel, because most people would not read a book with so many
pages.
Word Forms: truncate, truncately, truncation Related Word: trunk

turgid: (adj) pompous or swollen
Turner wrote a turgid speech that was sure to alienate at least half the audience with its pompousness.
Word Forms: turgidity, turgidness, turgidly  Antonym Forms: unturgid, unturgidly

turpitude: (n) vile, shameful behavior
In the play, the character’s turpitude exceeds the villainous behavior exhibited by typical antagonists.

tyro: (n) a beginner
As a tyro at snow skiing, Tyrone hired an instructor to give him a lesson before heading up the mountain.
Word Form: tyronic

ubiquitous: (adj) existing everywhere at once; omnipresent
The fog was ubiquitous, blanketing the countryside.
Word Forms: ubiquitously, ubiquitousnessAntonym Form: nonubiquitary, nonubiquitous, nonubiquitously

umbrage: (n) offense; displeasure
The customer took umbrage at the clerk's rudeness and reported him to the corporate office.

unctuous: (adj) unpleasantly and excessively suave
The unctuous salesman winked at the ladies and flashed his college football ring at the men; ironically, his “charm”
chased most customers away.
Word Forms: unctuously, unctuousness, unctuosity

untenable: (adj) impossible to defend
Tina made an untenable argument that fell apart on cross examination.
Word Forms: untenably, untenability, untenablenessAntonym Form: tenable

upbraid: (vb) to criticize severely
The sergeant upbraided the cadet for failing to put his gun together correctly.
Word Form: upbraider  Antonym Form: unupbraided

usury: (n) the practice of lending money at an extremely high interest rate
If you borrow money from a loan shark instead of from a bank, nothing can protect you from the resulting usury.
Word Form: usurious

vacillate: (vb) to waver or move back and forth
Vanessa vacillated between the two universities; one minute she was attending the in-state school, and the next she
was going to the college three states away.
Word Forms: vacillatingly, vacillation, vacillant, vacillator Related Word: oscillate

vainglorious: (adj) feeling excessive self-importance or pride for one’s own accomplishments
The vainglorious actor brushed aside the reporter’s question about the charity in order to talk about the Oscar he
won.
Word Forms: vaingloriously, vaingloriousness, vainglory Related Word: vain:

venerated: (adj) highly respected
The venerated teacher had earned the respect of his students by helping them meet the high expectations he set for
them.
Word Forms: venerate, venerable, venerably, venerability, veneration, veneratively, venerator

veracity: (n) honesty; truthfulness
The mechanic was known for his veracity, so customers trusted his diagnoses of their car problems.
Word Form: veracious Antonym Form: nonveracity Related Words: verify, verisimilitude

verbose: (adj) using or containing too many words
At the graduation ceremony, the valedictorian gave a verbose speech that caused many people to fall asleep.
Word Forms: verbosely, verboseness, verbosity Related Word: verbal

verdant: (adj) green with color or green with inexperience
The verdant garden was lush with plants.
Word Forms: verdancy, verdantlyAntonym Forms: unverdant, unverdantly

verisimilitude: (n) the appearance of truth; the quality of seeming to be true
Even though the movie was based on a true story, the film lacked verisimilitude.
Word Forms: verisimilitudinous, verisimilar, verisimilarly Related Words: veracity, similitude

vestige: (n) a small trace
The bricks from one corner of the foundation were the last vestiges of the historic hotel.
Word Forms: vestigial, vestigially, vestigium

vicissitude: (n) a change or variation
After a period of vicissitude in which Vin experienced much loss, he rebounded and regained control of the company.
Word Forms: vicissitudinous, vicissitudinary

vim: (n) energy and enthusiasm; vitality
Surprisingly, Victor attacked the science project with vim; he usually procrastinated and bemoaned such homework.

virtuoso: (n) a person who has mastered a certain skill or field
Tonight I am attending a free concert in the park that features a young virtuoso on the violin.
Word Forms: virtuoso (adj.), virtuosic, virtuosity Related Words: virtue, virtuous

viscous: (adj) sticky; thick
The viscous nature of maple syrup makes it difficult to remove from dishes once it hardens.
Word Forms: viscously, viscousness, viscosity

vitiate: (vb) to make imperfect; to corrupt
The king was vitiated by power; soon after his coronation, he began to abuse his subjects and destroy the fair laws.
Word Forms: vitiable, vitiation, vitiator

vitriolic: (adj) harsh or corrosive in tone
The orchestra teacher’s vitriolic criticism stung Victoria; she had practiced all week only to be harshly critiqued in
front of the entire class.
Word Forms: vitriolically, vitriol

vituperate: (vb) to use abusive language
A children's welfare agency was contacted when the mother vituperated her son in the doctor's office.
Word Form: vituperator  Antonym Form: unvituperated

vociferous: (adj) marked by loud outcry
When the newspaper ran an article on the benefits of a dress code, there were vociferous complaints from the
students.
Word Forms: vociferously, vociferousness, vociferate, vociferation, vociferant, vociferator Related Word: voice

voluble: (adj) talkative or fluent with words
The voluble hairdresser talked the entire time he cut my hair.
Word Forms: volubility, volublyAntonym Forms: nonvolubility, nonvoluble, nonvolubleness

wane: (vb) to grow smaller
Wayne’s interest in basketball began to wane after he played hockey; he even sold his basketball shoes to buy skates.
Antonym: wax Note: These two words are often used to describe the fullness of the moon.

wanton: (adj) unrestrained; immoral; unjustified
The pundit released wanton criticism on the book, even though it had been reviewed positively by other critics.
Word Forms: wantonly, wantonnessAntonym Form: unwanton

whimsical: (adj) characterized by carefree impulses
The babysitter’s whimsical personality meant that the kids were never bored; one minute they were making peanut
butter cookies, and the next they were reenacting a scene from a famous play.
Word Forms: whimsically, whimsicality Related Words: whim, whimsy

wily: (adj) sly and cunning
The wily real estate agent tried to get us to buy the house even though it was full of termites.
Word Forms: wile, wilily, wiliness  Antonym Form: unwily

wistful: (adj) expressing longing or yearning
Willie gave the car one last wistful look before he left the dealership; he wished he had the money to buy it.
Word Forms: wistfully, wistfulness

wizened: (adj) shriveled
The old man's face was wizened with age.
Word Form: wizen

wraith: (n) a ghost
Ray was upset after seeing a wraith which he believed forecasted his death.
Word Form: wraithlike

zealous: (adj) enthusiastic and devoted
The zealous sports fan had a tattoo of his favorite team’s logo on his ankle.
Word Forms: zealously, zealousness, zealot Related Word: zeal

zenith: (n) the highest point
The actress reached the zenith of her career when she won an Oscar for her role in the blockbuster.
Word Form: zenithal

zephyr: (n) a soft breeze
The cool zephyr coming off the water was refreshing in the hot sun.